LAT BRA oe ek HE ee oe 


Helm TO ANALYZE PEGPLE 


Ty | 4 
aE | ae 


DARK PSYCHOLOGY 
PARK 


Cte WYE BE HLA ORL THERAPY 1C BT] 


ha 


ail ben 


z 
` 
= 
be 
5 
F 


Mani 


Senet Gribi oh 


Jemy harik 


ó BOOKS IN 1 


anes Emeni ini 


risang Packs Hoy: 


“an ES 


DARK PSYCHOLOGY 


6 BOOKS IN 1 


Introducing Psychology, How To Analyze People, 
Manipulation, Dark Psychology Secrets, Emotional 
Intelligence & Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, 


Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse 


© Copyright 2020 by BENEDICT GOLEMAN - All rights reserved. 


This content is provided with the sole purpose of providing relevant information on a specific topic 
for which every reasonable effort has been made to ensure that it is both accurate and reasonable. 
Nevertheless, by purchasing this content, you consent to the fact that the author, as well as the 
publisher, are in no way experts on the topics contained herein, regardless of any claims as such that 
may be made within. As such, any suggestions or recommendations that are made within are done so 
purely for entertainment value. It is recommended that you always consult a professional prior to 
undertaking any of the advice or techniques discussed within. 


This is a legally binding declaration that is considered both valid and fair by both the Committee of 
Publishers Association and the American Bar Association and should be considered as legally 
binding within the United States. 


The reproduction, transmission, and duplication of any of the content found herein, including any 
specific or extended information, will be done as an illegal act regardless of the end form the 
information ultimately takes. This includes copied versions of the work, both physical, digital and 


audio unless express consent of the Publisher is provided beforehand. Any additional rights reserved. 


Furthermore, the information that can be found within the pages described forthwith shall be 
considered both accurate and truthful when it comes to the recounting of facts. As such, any use, 
correct or incorrect, of the provided information will render the Publisher free of responsibility as to 
the actions taken outside of their direct purview. Regardless, there are zero scenarios where the 
original author or the Publisher can be deemed liable in any fashion for any damages or hardships 


that may result from any of the information discussed herein. 


Additionally, the information in the following pages is intended only for informational purposes and 


should thus be thought of as universal. As befitting its nature, it is presented without assurance 


regarding its prolonged validity or interim quality. Trademarks that are mentioned are done without 


written consent and can in no way be considered an endorsement from the trademark holder. 


Table of Contents 
Introducing Psychology 


Introduction 
Ancient Psychological Thought 
The Philosophy of the Mind 
From Philosophical to Scientific 
The Spread of Psychology 
The Rise of Psychoanalysis 
Chapter 2: What is Psychology? 
The Study of the Mind 


The Psychodynamic Perspective 


The Behavioral Perspective 


The Cognitive Perspective 


The Humanistic Perspective 


Chapter 3: Emotional Intelligence and Psychology 
Defining Emotional Intelligence 
The Pillars of Emotional Intelligence 
Emotions and Emotional Intelligence 
Emotional Intelligence and Empathy. 
Emotional Intelligence and Communication 


Chapter 4: Emotions and Psychological State 


The Purpose of Emotions 


The Cause of Emotions 


The Universal Emotions 
Emotions, Moods, and Feelings 

Chapter 5: Mar 
When Thoughts Require Management 
Managing Thoughts 


houghts and Regulating Emotions 


aging T) 


Managing your Thoughts and Feelings 


Emotional Regulation 


Chapter 6: Principles of Psychology and Your Relationships 


The Psychology of Relationships 
Healthy Relationships 


Reciprocity and Relationships 


Commitments and Relationships 
ee a en 


Bevehalaey of Success and Emotional ee 


Developing Emotional Intelligence for Leadership 


Chapter 8: Using Psychology to Fight Procrastination 


The Problem with Procrastination 


Why People Procrastinate 
Defeating Procrastination with Psychology 


Visualize Your Future 


Accountability, 
Bribes 
Conclusion 


How To Analyze People with Dark Psychology 


Intro duction 


fees to pem | ie 


When to Analyze People 


Chapter 2: Personality_Types 
What is Personality? 


Why. Personality Matters 
“eh -Briggs Type Indicator 


identify ing i TPS 


Verbal De 


Nonverbal Communication 


The Power of arene fas nguage 
Why Falsify? 
Identifying Others Falsifying Their Body Language 


Chapter 6: Detecting Lying 


Deception 
Types of Deception 
Signs of Deception 


Identifying Deception 


Why Deception is Used 
Chapter 7: Dark Psychology 
What is Dark Psychology? 

The Dark Triad 

Why Use Dark Psychology? 
pter 8: Dark Psychology and the Mind 

How Dark Psychology Works 


Example 2: Sales with Dark Persuasion 

Example 3: Emotional Manipulation with Dark Psychology 
Chapter 9: Analyzing Body Language with Dark Psychology 
LOSY. 


Analysis with Dark Psycho! 


Mirroring 

Chapter 10: Dark Psychology’s Effects 
Ethical Dark Psychology 
Malicious Dark Psychology 


ms of Manipulation 


Benevolent Dark Psychology 


Conclusion 


Manipulation and Dark Psychology 


Introduction 


Chapter 1: What is Manipulation? 


Manipulation Tactics 


Manipulation Techniques 


Chapter 2: When and Why to use Manipulation 


anipulates? 


Using Persuasion 
Persuasion in the World 
Chapter 4: Mind Control Techniques with Persu 
Principles of Persuasion 
Rhetoric 


Persuasive Psychology and Influence 


Create an Appeal to Needs 
Loaded Words 


Anchor Biases 


cane 6: What is NLP? 
Neuro-Linguistic Programming 
The Keys to NLP 
The History of NLP NLP 
Chapter 7: NLP Basic Principles to Improve Life 


Know your outcome 


Take action 

Sensory acuity 
Behandoral Flexibility 
NLP to Control Minds 
Mirroring 


Anchoring 


ee 71 
Learning to Read Body Language 


Pacing and Lead 


Chapter 9: Improving Communication Skills 


Making Eye Contact 
Listening Effectively, 
Confident Body Language 
Chaplet 10: NLP for a Successful Life 


Content Reframing 
Anchoring Yourself 
Conclusion 


Dark Psycholo; 


A 


y Secrets 


Introduction 

Chapter 1: Dark Psychology. 
Defining Dark Psychology. 
The History_of Dark Psychology, 

pter 2: The Dark Side of Personality. 
A Note on Empathy. 


Machiavellianism 


Narcissism 


Psychopathy, 


Dark Personalities and Abuse 
Chapter 3: Manipulation 
Defining Manipulation 
Using Manipulation 
Recognizing the Manipulator 


Defending Against Manipulation 


Techniques to Control Minds 
Mind Control with Implanted Ideas 
Using Mind Control 


Chapter 4: Manipulation 


Chapter 5: The Power of Persuasion 


What is Persuasion? 


Principles of Persuasion 
Rhetoric 


Chapter 6: Brainwashing 


What is Brainwashing? 


Why. Brainwash? 


Chapter 7: annie 


Defining Deception 

Types of Deception 

Detecting Deception 
Chapter 8: NLP Mind Control 

What is Neuro-Linguistic Processing? 

NLP to Control Minds 

NLP and Mirroring 

NLP to Create Anchors 

NLP and Pace and Lead 
TAT 9: 


H ypnosis 


ter 10: The Bene je Benefi ts of Dark Psychology, 
Is Dark ‘k Psychology Evil? Evil? 


Reasons to Use Dark | ea 


Pi 


Perri 


Emotional Intelligence & Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy (CBT) 


Chapter: 1: Emotional | Intelligence 
What is E1 
The History_of Emotional Intelligence 


notional Intelligence? 


Chapter 2: The Purpose of Emotional Intelligence 


Emotional Intelligence in Real Life 
The Practicality_of Emotional Intelligence 
Traits of Emotional Intelligence 


Chapter 3: The Pillars of Emotional Intelligence 


Self-Awareness 
Self-Management 
Social Awareness 


chani 5: Intro to » Cognitive } Behavioral Therapy 
What is CBT? 
How CBT Works 
Why_CBT is Used 
Negative Thinking and CBT 
Chapter 6: Cogni 


itive Therapy_and Behavioral Therapy 


Understanding Cognitive Therapy, 


— Behavioral Therapy 


Affirmations 

Graded Exposure 
What-If Roleplays 
Chapter 9: Depression 


What is Depression? 


ert of a 


Goal ay 
Activity Scheduling 


Chapter 11: Insomnia 


aa 12: Cogn ative Behavioral Therap 
Insomnia 


Stimulus Control 
Sleep Restriction 
Relaxation Training 
Chapter 13: Anger 


Anger and Motivation 


Ang 


er Disruption 


Acceptance and Forgiveness 
Mirroring 


Empathizing 


Active Listening 
Understanding Body Language 


Introduction 
Chapter 1: Abuse in Relationships 
What is Abuse? 


The ET of Abis 
The Challenges of Escaping Abuse 


— 2: RERET Emotional Abuse 


Effects of ETET Abuse 


Emotional Abuse Tactics 


pam ii Ackn aa 


Preparing to Leave 
Avoid Triggering Abuse 


Stress Management 


Sahel nai 
Chapter 4: Recovering 


Take Time to Grieve 


Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse 


s from Emotional Abuse 


Recovery 


Reclaim Your Life 


Create Your Boundaries—and Enforce Them 
Forgive Yourself 
Reclaim Your Narrative 
Seek Professional Help 

Chapter 5: The Narci: 
Narcissistic Personality Disorder 


The Narcissist 
The Narcissist’s Target 


tic Abuser 


Identifying Narcissistic Abusers 


Chapter 6: Narcissistic Abuse 


Signs of Narcissistic Abuse 


Mirroring and the Narcissist 
Love e Bombing. and the Narcissist 


Chapter 7: The Effects of N Narcissistic Abuse 
Echoism 


Losing Self-Confidence 


Becoming Codependent 
Mental Health Issues 


Chapter 8: Disarming the Narcissist 
Cut Off Contact Completely 
Become the Grey Rock 


Take Advantage of Time 
Create and Enforce Boundaries 


Create Some Distance 


—— 9: ‘Leaving the Abusive Relationship 


Create a Safety Plan 


Create an Escape Plan 
The Aftermath 

Chapter 10: Staying Fre 
Find Support 


Write Down Your Reasons for Leaving 
Find a Hobby 


Chapter 11: The Importance of Empathy 


What is Empathy? 
Types of Lm of _ 


Conclusion 


Introducing Psychology 


Psychological Guide to Improve Emotional 
Intelligence and Develop a Strong 
Personality for Success, Positive Thinking, 
Mindfulness, Trust and to Block 


Procrastination 


Introduction 


Congratulations on purchasing Introducing Psychology, and thank you for 


doing so. 


Have you ever wondered why people do what they do? Or what makes you 
think or act the way you do? Usually, people pride themselves as being 
particularly unique. We assume that we are entirely autonomous, able to 
make decisions on what we want, and need with ease. We assume that there 
is no way that someone else can control our actions or feelings simply 


because we are superior beings and entirely rational. 


However, people tend to forget that, at the root, they are not as powerful as 
they try to make themselves out to be. Our methods of thinking are not 
unique in any sense—in fact, the thinking of other people can be regularly 
and readily predicted by those who study it. In particular, everything that 
you do reduces down to a certain triggering of neural impulses via brain 
chemistry. That feeling of falling in love is nothing but hormones and 
electrical impulses, as is the anger that you feel when someone wrongs you, 
and the joy that you feel when you are finally able to hold your newborn 
child for the first time. Effectively, everything is able to be reduced down to 
simple numbers. Just as the computer processes all of its functions in 
impulses, so too does the brain. 

Psychology seeks to understand the why and how of what happens in the 
mind. In particular, it is the scientific study of the mind. Of course, there are 
different interpretations of what that could mean. It could be the 
understanding of what the mind does and seeing exactly how, on a 


biological level, it works. It could be watching to understand the behaviors 


themselves. Ultimately, what is important in psychology is figuring out 
exactly what is going on within the human mind in order to understand how 


it functions and how to predict behaviors. 


Understanding psychology can help you better understand people 
themselves. When you know the reasons why people get attached, how 
these attachments occur, and how to facilitate that sort of attachment, you 
can very effectively understand how to work around them. If you know that 
certain things will get certain reactions, you can ensure that you always get 


the best reactions from those that you interact with. 


Within this book, you will be introduced to entry-level psychology. You 
will get an idea of the history of psychology and how it has changed over 
time with advancements in technology and what people can do. You will 
see how there are several perspectives through which you can address 
behaviors and actions as well. You will see how psychology impacts every 
aspect of your life, looking in-depth at emotional intelligence and 
psychology, the emotional state of someone else and psychology, and more. 
You will gain a solid understanding of what emotions are, how they are 
believed to occur, and why we have them. You will learn about the seven 
universal emotions and what they are meant to convey. You will learn about 
managing those very emotions, as well as any thoughts that may underlie 
them in an art known as cognitive behavioral therapy, which is used in 
order to combat mental health issues such as anxiety or anger. You will 
then be guided through three distinct concepts: How psychology impacts 
your relationship, your chances at success, and how it can ward off 
procrastination. When you understand these concepts, you can then begin to 


take action, taking advantage of your newfound knowledge of how the 


mind works in order to ensure that you are able to do always put your best 
foot forward. You can use your knowledge of how your mind works to 
benefit your relationships, help yourself move toward success, and to fight 


procrastination. 


There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for 
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much 


useful information as possible; please enjoy! 


Chapter 1: A Brief History of Psychology 


For as long as people have been able to record history, they have been 
interested in understanding the mind. People have been interested in the 
study of behavior and how the mind works even in ancient Greece. This is 
significant—people have been trying to figure out how people work and 
why they work the way that they do for as long as they have been 


recording. 


Of course, in the ancient days, the explanations were often filled with spells 
and exorcisms that were designed to drive away the demons that were 
assumed to be the root cause. What is significant about this is the fact that it 
began the look at the human mind, creating a clearly defined point between 
what is considered normal behaviors versus what would be considered to be 
a problematic sort of behavior that people reject. It was known that certain 
patterns of behaviors were problematic and not within the realm of 
normalcy—the people seeking to understand how to treat these abnormal 


behavioral patterns were engaging in a sort of primitive psychology. 


The history of psychology has come a long way from believing that people 
with abnormal behavior are possessed and require some sort of exorcising 
in order to treat them. Nowadays, people’s proverbial demons are able to be 
addressed and treated through other means, such as with medication and 
therapeutic processes, to ensure that people get what they need in order to 


thrive. 


Within this chapter, we will see a comparison of then and now, as well as 
looking at key moments in between. Understanding the evolution of how 
this information was discovered and why it has worked the way that it does 
is critical to better understanding people in general. We will see how what 
was once the philosophy of the mind and thought eventually shifted over 


into modern psychology that is actionable. 


Keep in mind that, as you read this, you are getting a condensed timeline of 
some of the most notable moment in psychology. There is more to it than 
just what is presented to you, but in order to avoid writing a book of its 
own, you will be provided just the gist of what happened within each of the 


steps from ancient psychology all the way to modern cognitivism. 


Ancient Psychological Thought 


Even in ancient history, there was a need to understand the mind, the brain, 
and the workings of humankind. In fact, some of the first medical 
recordings in history will relate to the brain and behavior. People sought to 
understand how not only the body worked, but how to heal it as well. 
Around the world, it is possible to find all sorts of documentation on how 


psychology has developed, from Egypt to China, and from Greece to India. 


The Edwin Smith Papyrus 

Perhaps the most ancient known acknowledgment of the brain and how it 
worked is found in the Edwin Smith Papyrus. Named for the individual that 
bought it in the 1800s, this scroll is believed to date back to around 1600 
BCE. In particular, this scroll described details on actively treating several 
different medical conditions and injuries that are important to understand. 
These not only include injuries and attempts to treat ailments such as a 
gaping wound, but also information about the brain, the nerves, and how the 


injuries of certain types can create certain unintended side effects. 


In particular, it was discussed that brain injuries would impair both motor 
and sensory functions. This is relevant—it identifies the fact that the brain 
is responsible for controlling the body. Not only were the injuries noted, but 
also noted the first explanations that were ever recorded of the structures of 
the brain, as well as how to treat injuries and when to know not to. ‘ 

While this particular document did not explain much about behaviorism, it 
does create a foundation for the idea of psychology and the brain becoming 
a legitimate medical and, therefore, scientific field. The knowledge 


involved in this scroll was found to far exceed even Hippocrates, believed 


to be the founder of modern medicine, who lived 1000 years after the 


penning of these scrolls. 
The First Psychology Experiment 


Perhaps the beginning of psychological study, however, came with the 
experimentation of Lin Xie in the 6" century AD. This experiment sought to 
understand how vulnerable people were to being distracted, and in 
particular, they involved the active testing of several people to determine 


what they were capable of doing when distracted. 


In particular, Lin Xie had people drawing a square with one hand while 
actively drawing a circle with the other in order to determine if they could 
control both sides of their body in different manners at the same time. 
While this does not provide much insight to us today, it is commonly 
believed to be the birth of the study of the mind and what humanity can do 
as an experimental science. Just as with the Edwin Smith Papyrus, then, this 
is important to recognize not for the contribution itself, but because it began 
to set the stage to understand psychology as a science instead of as an 


aspect of philosophy. 


The Vedanta 


Moving forward in history, the next major acknowledgment of psychology 
could be seen in India’s Vedanta. This was a series of Buddhist 
philosophical writing that acknowledged the sense of self. In particular, it 
addressed several concepts that anyone with even a little bit of psychology 
knowledge would recognize as common psychological keywords. In 


particular, the Vedanta addressed feelings of the mind in several ways. 


These were recognizing aggregates, emptiness, the non-self, and 
mindfulness. 

In particular, aggregates encompassed the understanding of five distinct 
concepts. These were form, sensation, perception, mental formations, and 
consciousness. Form acknowledged the physical or material existence of 
anything, in particular in relation to the four elements of earth, water, fire, 
or wind. Sensation referred to any sort of sensory interaction with objects in 
ways that are either positive, negative, or neutral. Perception referred to the 
understanding of a sensory and mental process. Effectively, it allows for the 
recognition and labeling of something, such as the acknowledgment that the 
furry little quadrupedal animal in front of you is a cat, or that the plant next 
to you is the color green. Mental formations refer to the ability to create an 
understanding of activities. It is the idea of conditioning a feeling or action 
based upon the exposure to an object. Finally, consciousness refers to an 
awareness of something around or in front of you, as well as an ability to 


understand its components. 


Abu Zayd Ahmed ibn al-Balkhi and the Psyche 


As we move on from India into the Middle-East, we meet a Persian scholar 
who was particularly interested in science and psychology. He was the first 
to introduce mental health and mental hygiene, treating them as a method to 
treat the soul. In particular, he penned Sustenance for Body and Soul, 
calling it a form of spiritual health. In his work, he described that physical 
and mental health are directly connected to each other, recognizing that 
spiritual and psychological health are intricately intertwined and that 
doctors of the day would emphasize too much on the body without ever 


treating the mind as well. 


In particular, he asserted that because of the fact that people are both their 
soul (or mind) and body, it is important that they must both be healthy. In 
addition, he was certain that if the body gets sick, then the psyche loses its 
ability to function, referring to the fact that when you are sick physically, 
you usually feel exhausted, foggy, and unable to really properly function. If 
the psyche gets sick, then, of course, the body would also struggle, leading 


to physical responses to mental illnesses. 


Additionally, he was the first to recognize that there is a difference between 
neurosis and psychosis, asserting that neurosis is distressing, but still allows 
for functioning, whereas psychosis involves a disconnect between reality 
and fantasy. He identified four distinct emotional disorders, which you may 
recognize as being quite similar to several of the more commonly known 
disorders of today. These were fear and anxiety, anger and aggression, 
sadness and depression, and obsession. When discussing depression, three 
types were considered: normal depression, endogenous depression that is a 
response to something physical, and clinical depression, which is more 


reactive. 


Al-Balkhi also was able to identify treatment for these sicknesses, such as 
talking through a loss, advising, and counseling, and also internal manners, 
such as learning to develop other methods of thinking in order to help cope 
with them. Effectively, this was the first real step toward the psychology 
that you know today. 


The Philosophy of the Mind 


Up until relatively recently, psychology was not seen as a science the way 
that it is today. Rather, it was considered a branch of philosophy until well 
into the 1800s. If you are familiar with philosophy at all, you may recognize 
some of the bigger names that are discussed here. Influential philosophers, 
such as Immanuel Kant, Rene Descartes, David Hume, and John Locke all 
busied themselves with ways to tackle the mystery of the human mind. Ever 
the deep thinkers, these philosophers sought to address why we behave the 
way that we do, coming up with ideas that would become the forefront of 


modern-day psychology. 
Rene Descartes 


Even if you are not particularly savvy with philosophers, you are likely 
familiar with Descartes. Considered the father of modern philosophy, he 
was responsible for spreading far more than just philosophical ideas or 
thoughts—he also contributed greatly toward calculus, and more 
importantly to this book, the idea of dualism: a concept within psychology 
that recognizes that there is an inherent difference between the mind and the 
body. Effectively, dualism declares that the mind is one thing that is not 
physical, compared to the brain, which is physical and recognizes the split 


between the two. 


With his monumental words, “Cogito, ergo sum” (I think; therefore, I am), 
Descartes tackled the concept of dualism head-on. He recognized that the 
mind and body had to interact somewhere, believing that the pineal gland 


was the area through which the mind can interact with the body. 


In his work, The Passions of the Soul, written in 1646, he declared that 
there were animal spirits that influenced the human soul—these spirits were 
known as passions, and there were six that he identified. These were 
wonder, love, hatred, desire, joy, and sadness. As you can identify, these are 
quite similar to the universal emotions, missing only a few of them. 
Effectively, the thought was that the pineal gland served as the connection 
between the soul (or mind) and body, but the animal spirits could sort of 
hijack that connection, causing the body to react in ways that are not 


necessarily intended. 


John Locke 


Continuing along with the theme of philosophers and psychology, we must 
now look at John Locke. In particular, he was interested in the cognitive 
abilities of people. In his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Locke 
attempted to address the foundation of human knowledge. He determined 
that the mind was effectively a blank slate at birth, with nothing stored 
within it. Think of the newborn mind, then, as a brand new hard-drive that 
has not yet been hooked up to your computer .He then described that, 
through time, the mind was filled with information and learning via 
experience. He was determined to reject the commonly accepted idea of 
innate ideas, such as the idea that all people are born with the ability to do 


or believe something. 


Locke, however, rejected that concept and stated that the idea of innate 
ideas, such as recognizing something as sweet, comes not because humans 


innately understand sweetness, but rather because the exposure to sweetness 


occurs incredibly early on before children are able to begin communicating 
what they know. Effectively, Locke addressed the idea of learning and 


knowledge. 


David Hume 


In the mid-1700s, the continuous pursuit for understanding of the human 
mind continued with David Hume’s A Treatise of Human Nature, designed 
to be a sort of combination between empiricism, skepticism, and naturalism. 
Effectively, 

He discussed the idea of ethics in relation to the mind—he described that 
people were enslaved to their passions, marking a difference between 
morality versus reason. Effectively, he wanted to address how and why 


people make the decisions that they do. 


Hume also addressed his own theory of mind and the passions—he 
determined that what we would refer to as emotions and desires (Hume’s 
“passions”) are impressions instead of being ideas. The passions felt, fear, 
grief, joy, hope, aversion, and desire, come directly in response from pain or 
pleasure. Further, his indirect passions, such as pride, shame, love, and hate, 
are a bit more complex and indirect—unlike the passions listed previously, 


indirect passions do not drive behavior but rather influence thinking. 


This can be summarized as attempting to identify how our feelings toward 
situations determine behaviors. While there is far more to Hume than just 
learning about emotions, this is the most relevant portion to the furthering 


of psychology. 


Immanuel Kant 


German philosopher Immanuel Kant helped propel psychology even closer 
to becoming its own proper discipline through his own writing. Kant felt 
that psychology of his own day was far too out of touch with true human 
experience, focusing too much on internal processes. Instead, he sought to 
look into how the mind worked. He wanted to answer questions about how 
knowledge is attained, how much we can know about an object, or how we 


could even learn to begin with. 


In the psychology of his time, knowledge was nothing but a replication of 
the external world within the mind. However, Kant acknowledged that the 
mind is far too complex to simply be a reflection for sensory input, and 
instead said that we gain knowledge through cognitive faculties. 
Effectively, we learn from our environment, but what we learn is not 
exactly what we see in front of us—it must be interpreted. The mind does 
not just learn—it receives input, understands that input, processes that 
input, and then learns from it, all of which are united by the sense of self. 
Effectively, the mind is a conglomerate of all of the mental faculties coming 
together. 


From Philosophical to Scientific 


Eventually, the bridge from philosophy to its own discipline arose. Up until 
the mid-1800s, it was seen as little more than theory, left to the philosophers 
to debate and understand amidst their politics and metaphysics. However, 
over time, it became clear that psychology varied greatly from true 
philosophy. While both were endlessly fascinated with understanding why 
something happened or how it worked, psychology was not dependent upon 
logic. Philosophy itself is an incredibly logic-driven field—everything must 
fit within certain boundaries, and if they do not fit within those boundaries, 


then they are likely to be rejected from philosophical discussion. 


However, as psychology grew more and more complex, with questions to 
consider, such as why some people tended to behave one way in response to 
one thing, but another person would respond entirely different, it became 
clear that psychology would require more than just logic and observation. It 


required experimentation. 


It was the growing understanding of physiology as well as the need for 
scientific studies that began to really propel psychology into its own 
discipline, entirely separate from philosophy. It became clear that the 
continued study of the mind would require that level of scientific structure 
toward it, as seen through the work of the mid-1800s German physiologist, 
Wilhelm Wundt. 


Wilhelm Wundt and the Principles of Physiological Psychology 


In 1874, Wundt published a book known as Principles of Physiological 
Psychology. This was largely considered to be one of the first links between 
physiology and the study of human cognition and behavior. His opening of 
the world’s first psychology lab in 1879 became known as the beginning of 


psychology of its own, and he began to push for empirical studies. 


Wundt focused on psychology as the study of consciousness, using 
experiments in order to study mental processes. The only way that this was 
possible at the time was through the use of introspection. Introspection was 
the act of informal reflection, as well as what Wundt defined as the process 
of experimental self-observation. Effectively, he would take several people 
and then train them to become their own psychologists; he taught them how 
to carefully analyze their own thoughts as free from judgment or bias as 


possible. 


Of course, most people see Wundt’s methods of gathering data to be about 
as far from unbiased as they could be—after all, there is no way to truly 
monitor the inner workings of someone else’s mind in order to test for 
veracity, and because of that, his methods today would likely be rejected as 
unscientific, but there is no doubt that this research was monumental in 


propelling psychology into its own discipline. 


Wundt’s lab educated an estimated 17,000 students, spreading the idea of 
psychology as its own concept far and wide. It is undeniable that, while 
many of his ideas were disconfirmed and made less influential over time, 


his own actions did act as the catalyst in the shift toward scientific 


psychology. 


The Spread of Psychology 


With Wundt’s spread of psychology through his educational lab, several 
other branches began to pop up as well. In particular, two became notable in 
the progress of psychology: Structuralism and functionalism. These were 
the first two schools in a chain of many that psychology would grow to see. 
They provided paradigms through which to look at the impact of 
psychology, using several common rules and thoughts that would guide the 


process. 
Edward Titchener and Structuralism 


Structuralism became the first school of thought of psychology. Within this 
school of thought, it was believed that the consciousness could be divided 
into smaller components, and through understanding those components, you 
would be able to begin to understand the mind. Like Wundt, Titchener made 
use of introspection as the primary mode of collecting data. Titchener made 
it a point to use several aspects of Wundt’s psychology, though it all had his 


Own spin. 


Unfortunately, structuralism never really took hold in the field, and as 


Titchener eventually died, so too did structuralism. 
William James and Functionalism 
With the rise of one school of psychology, several others began to pop up as 


well, all vying for the domination of the field. In almost a direct response 


and challenge to Titchener’s structuralism came functionalism. One of the 


first major American psychologists, William James, wrote a book known as 
The Principles of Psychology. With this book, he managed to dominate the 
American psychology field, and his book very quickly became the new 
standard that was used. The information within this book was not directly 
titled to be functionalism, but it did serve as the basis for the school of 
thought. 


As functionalism came onto the scene, it brought about an understanding of 
how behaviors function. IN particular, it cared about learning how 
behaviors benefit anyone at all. They sought to see how certain behaviors 
were conducive to the situation while others were far less so. Effectively, 
while both structuralism and functionalism emphasized the study of the 
unconscious mind, functionalism prioritized looking at consciousness as a 


continuous process through which everything was processed. 


Functionalism, too, died off after a while, though the theories left behind 


were still quite influential. 


The Rise of Psychoanalysis 


In the late 1800s, another familiar name to most people entered the 
limelight: Sigmund Freud. An Austrian neurologist, he became the founder 
of psychoanalysis. What set psychoanalysis apart from its counterparts was 
primarily the ability to begin therapeutically treating issues that have arisen. 
Effectively, the idea of psychoanalysis pushes forth the idea of the 
unconscious mind that drives everything, and in taking information from 
the unconscious to the conscious part of the mind, you can achieve catharsis 


—the ability to cope with the issue at hand. 


Effectively, Freud founded what would become one of the most influential 
aspects of modern psychology: The art of therapy. The principles of 
psychoanalysis very closely align with what you would see in modern 
techniques such as cognitive behavioral therapy, in which it is believed that 
unconscious thoughts influence your feelings, which drive certain 
behaviors, and that you can begin to restructure those thoughts into 
something more functional if you were to bring them to the conscious mind 


to address them. 


Psychoanalysis brought with it the psychodynamic approach to psychology, 
stepping away from the ideas of the past and instead focusing on the fact 


that the mind has several aspects to it that must be considered. 


Today, many of Freud’s own aspects are considered quite outdated, such as 
believing that everything is motivated by sex and sexual aggression. 
However, the principles he used in treating other people remain incredibly 


influential in today’s psychology. 


And with that, we have arrived at the first of the modern perspectives of 
psychology. That was an overview of thousands of years of development, 
taking psychology from theoretical philosophy to a hard science that is 


driven by evidence, numbers, and the scientific method. 


Chapter 2: What is Psychology? 


With the history of psychology behind us, it is time to begin to delve into 
the understanding of psychology as a field. Psychology itself is incredibly 
influential—it is necessary to be able to understand the mind in order to 
truly treat the mind. As we learn more and more about the mind, it becomes 
imperative that our ability to study it grows as well. Whereas before, it was 
assumed that some sort of emotional upset was a direct result of a demon or 
Spirit, it is now known to be caused by other causes, such as personality 
disorders or mental illnesses. Sometimes, it is biological in nature, such as 
having a physical structure of the brain that is different, while other times, it 


involves learned responses to a situation or to stimuli. 


Nevertheless, psychology itself, as a study of the mind, is critical to learn. 
As it is learned and developed, we gain so much more insight into what is 
going on with other people. We learn to acknowledge what holds other 
people back and what drives them forward. We see what drives people to 
behave altruistically or to take care of their family, and what drives them to 
harm others. To understand psychology is to understand being human and to 
understand being human is to be able to understand how to treat others with 


kindness and empathy. 


The Study of the Mind 


By definition, psychology is the scientific study of the mind and behavior, 
and it has done that. However, there is so much to the mind and behavior; 
think of all of the fields within psychology that exist. There are fields 
dedicated to understanding normal human development, seeing how 
children grow and learn. Other fields look at abnormal psychology and take 
a look at how it matters and how to treat it. Some people study how to 
learn, while others look at how drugs and other substances may impact the 
body and mind. At the end of the day, psychology covers anything to do 
with the mind, both mentally and physically. 


Psychology achieves this by having four main goals: To describe, explain, 
predict, and change the way that people think and act. We will go over each 
of these goals in a moment, but what is critical to understand here is that 
these goals drive psychology forward. They make it clear that we act in 
certain manners for certain reasons and see, to figure it out in order to make 


any changes if necessary. 


Describe 


The first goal is to describe behaviors and thought processes. This is critical 
if you want to be able to understand general rules that are typically 
exhibited in behavior. For example, if you want to be able to tell how 
someone is going to behave, you would look at several instances that show 
exactly how they are going to behave. We observe infants playing to figure 
out that at some point, something changes and they no longer think that 
something ceases to exist when it is out of sight. We watch how children 
interact with each other without guidance to identify when altruistic 


behavior starts to develop. 


Describing and observing create a critical first step precisely because they 
are responsible for developing a base understanding of standard behavior. In 
being able to analyze, you must figure out a base norm in order to figure out 


where the deviations from the norm are. 


Explain 


After being able to describe the processes of other people, explaining is the 
second goal. Upon being able to describe what occurs, such as watching the 
infants seem to come to the realization that, even when mom and dad are 
out of sight, they still exist, the law can start to be assembled. They can start 
to figure out why this happens. This is what happens during the second goal 
of psychology—explaining. 


Usually, this goal involves understanding what happened—it looks at the 
description of what has happened in the describe stage and then begins to 


come up with several theories that may or may not support it. These 


theories are meant to come up with whatever the explanation is for that 


particular behavior. 


Effectively, the psychologists will try to figure out the most reasonable 


explanation for why someone does something and then tries to test it. 


Predict 


As the empirical research yields potential explanations for the behavior 
being studied, psychology then moves toward prediction as the primary 
goal. During this stage, the explanations created in the previous step are 
taken and tested. If they fail to meet expectations, they are removed from 


the list, and they will try to come up with something else. 


For example, assume that you have been watching your child seem utterly 
baffled when you disappear and reappear playing peekaboo. You can then 
assume that your child thinks that you are gone when you disappear. You 
then predict that your child will react with the same sense of bafflement 
when you take that ball that he was playing with and cover it up with a 
blanket because the child will be looking for his ball. You test this out, and 


sure enough, your explanation was correct. 


Change 


Finally, once you have been able to describe, explain, and predict the 
behaviors, you can then begin to understand how to influence change in 
other people. You may look to help control a negative behavior, such as 


someone who suffers from anxiety learning to cope with those feelings. You 


may make it a point to look at someone who has obsessive-compulsive 
disorder, figure out their triggers, and then figure out how best to help them 


change that behavior. 


Effectively, change allows for behaviors to be modified in order for people 
to develop healthy coping mechanisms, even when they are faced with 
difficult situations, disorders, or struggles that make otherwise normal 
functioning difficult. You can learn how to overcome phobias once you can 
understand and predict the cause, or you can learn to fix issues with 
emotional regulation. You can challenge depression. You can correct 
negative thoughts. You can effectively begin treating the other person’s 


mind when you know how the mind is implicated. 


The study of psychology can largely be broken down into five distinct 
perspectives—each wishes to focus on an entirely different part of the mind. 
These different perspectives are the biological perspective, the 
psychodynamic perspective, the behavioral perspective, the cognitive 
perspective, and the humanistic perspective. Effectively, someone who 
looks at an issue such as depression from the biological perspective is going 
to be focused on the biology behind the depression being studied—it will 
look at neurotransmitters and areas of the brain that are responsible for the 
feelings. However, someone in the behavioral perspective may be looking 
for the way that the external world is directly responsible for influencing 


those feelings of depression. 


We will take a look at all five of these perspectives to get a solid working 


idea of all aspects of what is happening within the mind. While having one 


specific focus can be incredibly useful, it takes all five to put together a 


proper, complete view of what is happening. 


The Biological Perspective 


As you may have assumed, the biological approach is all about how your 
body impacts your mind. In particular, it is an attempt to understand the link 
between the mental states and body of someone else. If you are feeling 
happy, what is going on in the body? There is a physiological change in 
response to your feelings, and the biological perspective is incredibly 
interested in looking into it. Effectively, then, you will be looking into how 


the brain works. 


Within the biological perspective, effectively, you and your consciousness 
are all the collective sum of your body. Your brain all comes together to 
work through electrical impulses and chemicals, and those tiny impulses are 
what create you. In the great debate of nature vs. nurture, this is the nature 
part. It believes that the biology of the brain and body are what are 


important in determining the behaviors and thoughts of the other person. 


Just like the other perspectives, the biological perspective is entirely 
interested in understanding people and their behaviors. However, they want 
to look at other aspects. Genetics come into play, as do physical changes to 
the brain. They may take a special interest in how genetics influence all 
sorts of aspects of personality, like depression or anxiety, or how brain 


damage can lead to several issues in ability or behavior. In particular, 


biological psychologists will look into identical twins, learning as much as 


they can about the tendencies of people versus what they actually do. 


When you are using the biological perspective, you are likely going to use 
tools to observe the brain as directly as possible. Scans such as a PET or 
MRI can allow psychologists to view the brain’s physical structure in order 


to begin to make inferences on the behavioral aspects of the person. 


In particular, the biological perspective is a powerful one to take—when 
you use the biological perspective, you are effectively ensuring that you 
understand the physiology, and sometimes, that is enough. If you know that 
someone has suffered from a massive stroke and can see exactly where the 
damage is, for example, you can begin to predict exactly what parts of their 
behavior are likely to be impacted. It also means that certain behavioral 
changes may be approached as a sign of a physical medical issue, such as a 


brain injury or a tumor. 


This is also the perspective that would be responsible for ensuring that 
medication is effective. When the physiological cause is understood, it 
becomes far easier to begin identifying how best to medicate the issue. If 
there are certain parts of the brain that are struggling to create enough of a 
certain neurotransmitter, for example, then that can be medicated for in 


order to help the body to then help the mind. 


The Psychodynamic Perspective 


The psychodynamic approach began with Sigmund Freud’s psychoanalysis, 
but it did grow over time to encompass several other theories as well, such 
as the theories of Karl Jung, Erik Erikson, and Alfred Adler. Within the 
psychodynamic theory, it is believed that early childhood events influence 
almost everything. Effectively, during the early childhood period, you are 
particularly susceptible to being damaged and therefore internalizing issues 
within your unconscious mind. These lead to behavioral problems that are 


the results of the unconscious mind. 


In particular, you will see within the psychodynamic perspective; the 
emphasis is placed on the unconscious mind. Think of the mind like an 
iceberg—only the tip is visible. You can see the conscious part of the mind 
or the tip of the iceberg, but the vast majority of it is hidden beneath the 
surface of the water. Effectively, the unconscious mind houses almost 
everything. All of your motivational impulses are housed in the 
unconscious. Your feelings will come from it, your motives will be rooted 


in it, and your decisions will be based upon it. 


The unconscious mind, while incredibly powerful, is also incredibly 
impressionable. This, then, pushes the focus of human behavior from nature 


to nurture. 


Further, within the psychodynamic perspective, you see three parts of 


personality that arise: The id, the ego, and the super-ego. 


Your id refers to the instincts—it is inherited and holds all of your natural 
personality and behavioral tendencies. Your ego is the part of the mind that 
is meant to sort of mitigate the demands and desires of the id, which is 
primarily quite unrealistic, and the world around you. This is the part that 
makes decisions. Finally, the superego is the series of values and morals 


that are learned from both society and parents. 


The id and super-ego are considered the unconscious mind—they both fight 
to win the favor of the mind (ego). Effectively, your instinctive tendencies 
toward sex and aggressive behavior will constantly be trying to get you to 
act impulsively, while the learned portion is trying to keep you in line in 


order to guarantee that you will not do something that you should not be. 


The conflict leads to anxiety, which the ego must cope with somehow. 
These coping mechanisms become the method through which you behave. 
Effectively, then, the conscious mind is the slave for the unconscious mind, 
with the unconscious mind making the decisions and controlling. However, 
the unconscious mind is also influenced regularly by external features and 
instances. A trauma can, for example, lead to a change in the unconscious 


mind, which is then noticeable in the behavior. 


The Behavioral Perspective 


The behavioral perspective places emphasis on the environment on your 
behaviors. It asserts that you can effectively be trained to do just about 
anything if someone is willing to put in the effort to do so. When you 
believe in the behavioral perspective, you reject the idea of free will—you 
effectively declare that all behavior is learned through either reinforcements 


or punishment. 


Reinforcements refer to consequences that occur after a behavior that is 
either positive or negative. Positive refers to the fact that something was put 
in place, whereas negative refers to the act of something being removed. In 
this case, positive reinforcement is a pleasant situation that is added to 
encourage the behavior to continue. A negative reinforcement, then, is a 
situation being removed, usually an unpleasant one, in response to a 


behavior in order to encourage it to continue happening in the future. 


On the other hand, punishment is the act of something happening to 
discourage a behavior. It is the opposite of reinforcement in the sense that it 
is designed to be discouraging while reinforcement is enforcing. Like 
reinforcement, punishment can be both positive and negative. For example, 
positive punishment could entail adding extra chores in retaliation for not 
listening or lying about a situation. On the other hand, negative 
reinforcement is the act of removing something pleasing in order to deter 
the behavior in the future. For example, imagine that your teen daughter has 
not turned in several assignments, and she has her cell phone taken away 


until she gets them all in. You took away something pleasant, in this case, 


her cell phone, in order to discourage the behavior of continuing to miss 


assignments. 


Behaviorists believe that the above processes are what cause behavior to 
continue or discontinue. When you enjoy a situation or get something 
pleasant in response, you want to encourage doing something. When you 
realize that you have the same bad response every time you try to do 
something, you are going to learn not to do that behavior any more out of 
wanting to avoid the negative stimulus. Effectively, in behaviorism, 
thoughts do not matter—behaviors do. It does not matter how angry 
someone is about the consequences or how unfair your child believes losing 


her cell phone was—all that matters is the end result. 


The Cognitive Perspective 


Cognitive psychologists, on the other hand, assert that behavior is 
determined due to expectations. You have a certain thought about a 
situation and expect it to behave that way. Effectively, then, you make 
expectations that are informed based upon what you already know and try 
to make the proper inferences in your behavior. In this instance, you are 
solving problems and interacting with the world based on the memory of 
what has happened in the past. You assume that what has happened in the 
past will happen again in the future, or you make assumptions based on 


Similar events. 


This takes humanity away from the idea of being completely devoid of free 
will and instead as something that is capable of thoughts and feelings again. 
Of course, this also brings with it far more complication than was present 


otherwise. 


Imagine that you have plans to go out with friends for the night. You 
assume that the night will be full of fun—you and your friends would leave 
the kids at home, go to a movie, and then have dinner and a few drinks at 
your favorite restaurant. You get yourself all dressed up and ready, but 
when you arrive at the meeting place, you realize that two of your three 
friends have brought their children with them, which means that movie that 
you have wanted to see is no longer on the table, nor is having a few drinks 


with dinner, as there are little eyes there. 


In this instance, you are probably quite disappointed. You had certain 


expectations, only to have them completely overthrown, and that can be 


incredibly difficult for some people to cope with. However, according to 
cognitivists, you are not disappointed because of the fact that your friends 
brought their children along to what was supposed to be a kid-free event— 
you are annoyed because your own expectations were completely and 
utterly thrown out the window. The fact that the instance did not line up 
with your own expectations is why you are annoyed and disappointed. It is 
that thought process and the disconnect that is the root of the 
disappointment, not the fact that the other parties did something 


unexpected. 


This is where the idea of other people not being responsible for your own 
feelings comes from—only your own thoughts can influence your behavior, 
and no one else is responsible for them. Even if someone else does not live 
up to your own expectations, it is your own job to figure out how to manage 


that disappointment. 


The Humanistic Perspective 


Finally, the humanistic approach to psychology emphasizes that humans are 
motivated by their own inherent goodness. Effectively, people need to be 
empowered in order to become the best person that they are able to be. 
They want to offer support without the guidance, to empower individuals to 


make their own decisions. 


Humanistic psychology approaches the situation in a way that directly 
rejects those behaviorist and psychodynamic approaches that are believed to 
be too limiting. Instead, people are believed to be entirely free to make their 
own decisions, and inherently, they will always strive to be better. Those 
who use the humanistic approach emphasize the idea that people will 
actively work toward improvement, seeking to overcome difficult situations 


in order to attain what is known as self-actualization—satisfaction in life. 


Effectively, the driving force behind behaviors is not the brain or the 
environment, but rather the inherent drive people have to better themselves 
and their situation. Of course, this comes with its own implications as well 
—humanistic studies inherently reject scientific methodology. They instead 
focus on qualitative research, like discussing situations. These are 
effectively useful for individual studies to understand an individual person 


without trying to figure out the entirety of humankind’s behavior. 


Chapter 3: Emotional Intelligence 
and Psychology 


With the basics out of the way, it is time to begin discussing emotional 
intelligence. Emotional intelligence is incredibly trendy these days, and for 
great reason. Emotional intelligence itself has been used in several 
capacities, even before it was ever defined. It determines whether you are 
able to interact well with others or whether people will like you. It 
determines your successes, as well as how you move forward in improving 


in the future. 


Ultimately, nearly every behavior that you have is believed to be rooted in 
some way to your emotional intelligence, particularly from a cognitive 
perspective. Essentially, if your emotional intelligence acts as a driving 
motivator, you can begin to predict how people will behave based on how 


emotionally intelligent they are. 


What holds true no matter how much or little emotional intelligence 
someone has, it is primarily a skillset, and as a skillset, it can be developed 
and learned over time. You can learn to become emotionally intelligent, 
even if you are not naturally. You can spend the time to develop these skills 
in order to become the emotionally intelligent individual that you wish to 
be. 


Within this chapter, we will discuss what emotional intelligence is, touching 
upon the main purposes of emotional intelligence, the pillars of emotional 
intelligence, and how emotional intelligence relates to psychology concepts, 


such as emotions, empathy, and communication. As you read through these 


chapters, try to think about yourself. Do you have these skills that are being 
discussed? Do you feel like you are lacking in the empathy department, or 
perhaps that your communication could be better? If you think that you may 
struggle with your emotional intelligence, this is perhaps one of the most 


straightforward parts of yourself to work on. 


Defining Emotional Intelligence 


Before we begin, let’s create a working definition of emotional intelligence. 
Primarily, emotional intelligence is the ability to do three things. It involves 
being able to understand emotions, regulate your own emotions, and use 
your ability to understand emotions to manage and facilitate your 
relationships with other people. When you are emotionally intelligent, 
effectively, you are able to actively harness these abilities in order to 
achieve a high leadership potential. When you have that high leadership 
potential, you find that you are more capable and confident when you 
interact with other people. 


Effectively, emotional intelligence is largely able to determine whether you 
are able to understand your own emotions while still being able to regulate 
and influence the emotions of others as well. This skill is one that is critical 
to interpersonal relationships for several reasons—it determines how you 
approach other people. It determines how you are able to communicate with 
other people. It determines how likely you are to being annoyed by other 


people’s actions or inactions. 


Emotional intelligence is effectively the pinnacle of emotional maturity— 
when you learn to be emotionally intelligent, you are resilient and in 
control. You will be able to manage those difficult emotions, such as anger 
or sadness. You will be able to sense these signals in other people as well 
and act accordingly in order to help mitigate the negative effects or 
behaviors. You will be able to solve conflicts with other people with ease, 
and you will be just in tune enough with other people’s emotions to ensure 


that you are always helping people in the way that they need. 


People who are highly emotionally intelligent are incredibly skilled when it 
comes to being able to interact with other people, and this makes them 
incredibly desirable in relationships, workplaces, and as leaders. When you 
are emotionally intelligent, people will naturally flock to you, as they feel 
that you are trustworthy, confident, and charismatic enough to be a proper 


leader. 


The Pillars of Emotional Intelligence 


Ultimately, one of the simplest methods of understanding emotional 
intelligence and the skills it entails is through looking at emotional 
intelligence as a series of pillars. These are sorts of clusters of behavior that 
you will look at in order to get a better idea of the skills they entail. 
Emotional intelligence is commonly considered to have four pillars of 
emotional intelligence: Self-awareness, self-regulation, social awareness, 
and emotional regulation. Each of these four pillars is critical to 
understanding if you ever hope to master emotional intelligence for 


yourself. 


Self- 
Awarenes 


The Pillars of 
Emotional 
Intelligence 


telations 
hip 
Manage 
ment 


Social Awareness 


Self-Awareness 


The first of the pillars is self-awareness. As you may imagine, it entails 
your ability to check into your own emotional state at any given moment. 
Many people struggle to ever truly understand their emotions—they feel 
good or bad, but beyond that, they are unsure what they are feeling. This is 
unfortunate, as feelings have far more nuances than just good or bad. When 
you know exactly what you are feeling, you will be able to understand 
yourself better, recognizing your motivations and why you are doing what 
you are doing. 


Beyond just being aware of the emotional states, self-awareness also 
encompasses the ability to be aware of your own abilities in an accurate 
fashion. When you are able to identify your own abilities accurately, you 
know what you are capable of, as well as what you struggle with, and 
knowing this enables you to build up a reasonable, accurate, logical 
understanding of who you are as a person. You will know what you need to 
work on and what you are capable of, so you never volunteer to do more 


than you can handle. 


Self-awareness also entails the ability to be self-confident. You will 
effectively be able to trust yourself because you are so in-tune with your 
abilities. Effectively, knowing how you behave enables you to recognize 
when you should trust yourself to do something. If you can trust yourself to 
do something, you come across as more trustworthy to others. After all, it is 
incredibly difficult to trust someone that you do not know to do something 


for you or for other people. 


Self-Awareness 


e Emotional Self- 
awareness 


e Accurate self- 
assessment 
e Self-confidence 


Self-Regulation 


Self-regulation is the second of the pillars of emotional intelligence. When 
you are able to use self-regulation, you are able to manage your own 
emotions. With self-control, you are able to make sure that your emotions 


are always expressed in a method that is effective and appropriate. If you 


express your emotions in a way that is less than appropriate, or if you give 
in to whatever emotional impulses you feel, you are likely to burn bridges 
in relationships rather quickly, making this a critical skill. As satisfying as it 
may feel in the moment to scream at a customer, it would not be so 


satisfying to lose your job as a result. 


On top of that ability to control yourself, the ability to self-regulate involves 
plenty about your own intrinsic motivations. Those who are skilled at self- 
regulation tend to be achievement-oriented and self-motivated. This means 
that they are able to work toward their goals with their own initiative. When 
you are willing to be self-motivated, you show that you are willing to work 
through setbacks, even if those setbacks are such problems as 


procrastination and simply not being motivated to work. 


Self-regulation also comes with the ability to be transparent—you are open 
and honest when you are able to self-regulate. You may know that what you 
are saying or doing is less popular, but you trust yourself and that you are 
making the right decision by telling other people the truth. This brings with 
it a sense of trustworthiness. When you are trustworthy, other people are 


going to naturally feel like you are more approachable. 


Self-regulation, because it also involves the ability to control your own 
emotions, also brings with it the ability to become adaptable—you know 
that change happens sometimes, and you are willing and able to cope with 
it. You are able to manage your own expectations, even when they do not 
come into fruition. You know that there is plenty to learn from plans 
changing, even if they changed due to failure, and you are optimistic 


enough to keep hoping for the best. 


Self-Regulation 


¢ Emotional self-control 
¢ Achievement-oriented 
¢ Self-motivated 

e Transparent 

¢ Adaptable 

© Optimistic 


Social Awareness 


The third pillar of emotional intelligence is social awareness. This is the 
ability to understand other people. This skillset is critical if you want to be 
able to interact meaningfully with other people. If you want to be able to 
communicate with others, you need to be able to understand them, and that 
is the entire purpose of social awareness. Social awareness comes with 
three major skills: the ability to empathize, the ability of organizational 


awareness, and developing a service orientation. 


Empathy itself is the ability to connect with other people in a way that 
allows for the acknowledgment and understanding of their feelings. It is 
critical in relating to other people. You need to be able to acknowledge 
other people’s emotions if you wish to be able to understand people’s 
emotions, and you are not likely to be able to acknowledge the emotions of 


other people if you do not first understand your own feelings. 


Organizational awareness refers to your ability to manage how you explain 
yourself to others. It is effectively your ability to make sure that you are 


always speaking at a level that is readily understood by other people. You 


are able to ensure that the comprehension levels of those around you always 
line up with being just right. Think about how a presentation geared toward 
kindergarteners would go if it were given to high schoolers—they would 
not bother paying attention to it because it would be far too simple to be 
worth listening to. Likewise, if you were to deliver that same presentation 
to a bunch of kindergarteners despite being meant for high schoolers, the 
children probably will not understand very much. When you are able to use 
organizational awareness, however, you will be able to ensure that you are 
always speaking to the proper audience whenever you are trying to speak to 


someone else, allowing you to retain attention longer and more effectively. 


Finally, a service orientation refers to just how willing you are to help other 
people. It involves being willing to contribute to the efforts while also 
showing that you are happily willing to help guide your group to your 
desired goal. When you use this, you are able to make sure that you listen 


effectively as well. 


Social 


Awareness 
* Empathy 
* Organizational 


Awareness 
* Service Orientation 


Relationship Management 


The final pillar of emotional intelligence is relationship management. This 


particular pillar refers to the ability to manage relationships and influence 


other people. In order to develop relationship management, however, you 
must first develop all of the other pillars. Relationship management requires 
you to be intricately aware of your own emotions and behaviors, as well as 
able to control them. It requires you to have a solid understanding of other 
people as well. The skills in relationship management include being able to 
inspire leadership, influence others, manage conflict, trigger change, 
develop others, and be skilled in teamwork. 


Relationship management creates inspirational leaders who are capable of 
leading other people. Whether a leader through authority or respect or 
working as a mentor to other people, this skill is critical if you want to be 
able to manage others. This is what makes people willing to follow you in 
the first place. 


Influence allows those skilled at relationship management to ensure that 
they can convince other people to do what needs to be done. They are 
persuasive, articulate, motivating, and able to call people to action with 
ease. This skill is critical in leading others, as if you cannot get other people 
to do what they need to, you cannot lead them. 


Conflict management grants these individuals the ability to manage the 
relationships with other people, either interpersonally, or between two other 
people. They are able to facilitate the necessary communication between 
people to ensure that everyone is able to leave a situation feeling like they 
have been listened to and supported .Effectively, conflict management 
allows for the ending of arguments or opinions by ensuring that everyone 


ends up on the same page. 


The relationship manager is able to facilitate change in the world, even if it 
means that they have to be the catalyst for that change. They are willing to 
support any change that is necessary, even if that means they must take a 
difficult or uncomfortable position. They will do anything that is necessary 


to make that change happen. 


Because of the unique position of the leader, you need to be able to 
understand how other people interact with each other. If you can see two 
people that are interacting with each other in a certain way, you can usually 
begin to figure out who works best with whom. Being able to understand 
how people interact means that you can put together teams effectively, and 
being able to see the skills of other people means you will be able to point 
them in the right direction to ensure that everyone is always growing and 


moving toward their greatest potentials. 


Finally, the leader must be willing and able to work with other people 
effectively, no matter what happens. This requires an ability to cope readily 


and easily with any change that may arise. 


Relationship M anagem ent 


* Inspirational leadership 

* Influetial 

* Conflict manager 

* Change catalyst 

* Developing others 

¢ Teamwork and collaboration 


Emotions and Emotional Intelligence 


Emotions and emotional intelligence are intricately combined just by virtue 
of both being involved in the act of feeling and acknowledging emotions. 
As you have seen, emotions are sort of the primary backbone to the entire 
process of emotional intelligence. You must begin with understanding your 
own emotions if you want to be able to progress past that first stage of self- 
awareness, and without that awareness of your own emotions, you cannot 
ever hope to understand other people. If you cannot understand other 
people, how can you hope to ensure that other people are actively and 
readily willing and able to listen to you as a leader? If you cannot touch 
base with your own emotions, how can you expect other people to be 
willing to put up with you and your dramatics if any conflict were to ever 


arise? 


What is important to note is that despite the fact that emotional intelligence 
is primarily focused on behaving in ways that are not emotionally 
impulsive, it is not seeking out a blanket ban on emotions in general. In 
fact, emotional intelligence strongly encourages people to feel their 
emotions whenever possible and relevant. When you feel your emotions, 
you feel what your body and unconscious mind want you to. Your 
emotions, as you will learn in Chapter 4, are incredibly important. They 
serve a valuable purpose in keeping you regulated, and because of that, they 


should never be completely ignored or disregarded. 


Rather than disregarding emotions, emotional intelligence seeks to regulate 
the act of behaving impulsively in response. When you are able to become 


emotionally intelligent, you will effectively be learning how to stop when 


you do feel strong emotions so you can regulate them out. You will be able 


to prevent yourself from acting in an inappropriate manner. 


Imagine for a moment that you are incredibly angry—perhaps you just 
found out that your child broke your watch that was gifted to you by your 
late father. You are absolutely furious, as that was the last precious 
belonging of his that you had, and now it’s broken. If you are emotionally 
intelligent, you acknowledge that anger—you allow yourself to feel those 
emotions because being able to feel emotions is important to finding some 
sort of closure or resolution. However, despite acknowledging your anger 
and continuing to feel it, you are able to remind yourself that reacting in 
anger is hardly the right decision here. You remind yourself that acting in 
anger would do nothing but upset your child, how did not intentionally 
break the watch. It had been an unfortunate accident, and your child was 


devastated about it. You could see that much looking at his face. 


When you are able to acknowledge your emotions, recognizing the value 
that they bring to the table, you can use them to inform yourself. You can 
use the feeling of that emotion as your unconscious cue to remind yourself 
to slow down, relax, and continue moving forward. Effectively, you can 
make sure that you are able to use your emotions and the knowledge that 


you are feeling that emotion in order to help yourself self-regulate. 


Beyond just that, however, imagine that you are aware of other people’s 
emotions. Keeping in mind that emotions are indicative of a need that is 
currently going unmet when you are able to use emotional intelligence in 
order to better enable yourself to read the feelings of those around you, you 


are also able to understand the needs of those around you who may need 


your help sooner rather than later. When you can understand the needs of 
other people, you are also able to understand far more. You can understand 
how best to ensure that other people have their needs met, and with that, 


you can become an effective leader. 


Emotions are critical—we feel them for incredibly important reasons and 
attempting to disregard them, even when we are trying to think with a 


rational mindset, is doing a disservice to those around you. 


Emotional Intelligence and Empathy 


Empathy is one of the most critical skills in emotional intelligence. While 
being able to identify your own emotions is always important, what matters 
more in many cases is whether you can empathize. This is what bridges the 
gap from focusing on yourself to being able to accurately interact with 


others. 


If you look at the four pillars of emotional intelligence once more, you may 
notice that two of the pillars are focused on the self while the other two are 
directed outwards toward others. The way that you move from the self to 


the others is through being able to empathize. 


For example, imagine that you are able to recognize your own emotional 
states. You are quite confident in your ability to understand how you are 
feeling—you have learned the body language you need to know. You have 
figured out how best to identify when to step in and intervene on your own 
emotional outbursts. You know what your most common emotional triggers 
are. But, can you understand what other people are feeling? 


Being able to understand your own feeling is not a sudden ability to 
understand others as well—being able to understand the emotions of others 
requires empathy, but in order to really understand the feedback that you get 


via empathy, you must also understand your own emotional state as well. 
Forms of Empathy 


Empathy itself is defined as the ability to relate to other people, and it exists 


primarily in three different forms. You can empathize cognitively, 


emotionally, or compassionately. When you empathize cognitively, you 
understand the other person’s feelings from a straightforward perspective— 
you know what they are feeling simply because you recognize the signs. 
However, there is no emotional attachment on your part. You do not 
particularly care what the other person has that particular feeling—you 


simply know that they do. 


When you empathize emotionally, however, you are able to understand the 
feelings of the other person as well through feeling it yourself. You are 
effectively relating to the other person so much that you are able to feel the 
Same way. You see someone suffering, and you feel their pain as if it were 
your own. Even if you are not doing this unintentionally, most of the time, 
emotional empathy involves you automatically put yourself in the position 
of the other person in your mind. You know that you would be sad and 


scared if you had nowhere to live, and winter was rapidly approaching. 


When you empathize compassionately, which is the form of empathy that 
emotional intelligence emphasizes, you are effectively combining the 
previous two. You understand the person’s feelings cognitively, allowing 
you to have a solid idea of the feelings of the other person. You are also 
able to understand the other person’s emotions as you relate to them. When 
you empathize both cognitively and emotionally, you are often driven to 
emotional empathy—this drives you to act in some way. Feeling both 
cognitive and emotional relationship to the other person encourages you to 
act in some way to ensure that they are taken care of as well. You want to 
help them; however, you can to ensure that you can actively meet their 
needs to alleviate their suffering. There is rarely any motive for you other 


than to help. Your compassionate empathy is a sort of call to action that you 


obey in order to ensure that you actively meet the needs of those around 


you. 


The Purpose of Empathy 


Empathy primarily has two purposes that are both directly related to 
emotional intelligence: It acts as a way through which you can self-regulate, 
and it acts as a means of communication, primarily of nonverbal emotional 
signs. When you are able to empathize, then you are able to regulate, as 
well as read the signs in order to better understand the needs of those 


around you. 


However, before delving into that, consider for a moment why we would 
need to feel empathy in any degree. What does empathy do for you? Why 
does it matter? The answer is quite simple—we are a social species. In fact, 
nearly all of emotional intelligence is only relevant because we are a social 
species. When you live in a group setting, whether that is a family unit, a 
neighborhood, a tribe, or an entire city or town, you must be able to 
communicate. Humans, because we depend on others for survival, need to 


be able to communicate with others clearly. 


Think about humans “in the wild” for a moment—we are discussing human 
beings that have not yet made a move toward modern civilizations. We are 
specifically discussing the humans that had no choice but to hunt and grow 
their own food to survive. They had to exist in groups. Humans would hunt 
in groups with other people as well, allowing them to take down larger prey, 
which is critical when you consider how much weaker humans are 


compared to other animals. Humans had to rely on their tribes to help 


provide protection and to hunt. They relied on each other to live and 
traveled in these sort of tribes. 


Empathy allowed for nonverbal communication to be used. When you are 
running with a group of people in many life-or-death situations, you are 
going to want to understand the emotions of those around you, as those 
emotions will provide you with all sorts of information. You will be able to 
tell that those around you are scared when there is danger, or sad when they 
need help. However, even further than that, you can see what their needs are 
to help them meet them. You will be driven to act because you can feel the 
needs of the other person, and you are willing to help. 


When you are willing to help, you encourage the other person to be willing 
to help you whenever you find yourself caught in a moment of need. 
Altruism, that behavior of helping someone else at no benefit, and quite 
possibly a detriment to yourself is only an effective trait in a species that is 
primarily altruistic, so empathy keeps us on the right track. You know that 
you need to make sure that those around you are cared for and fed, so you 


make sure that you always have enough food to share. Of course, if you 


were to ever fall on tough times, then they would be more than happy to 


reciprocate and share with you. 


Beyond just survival, however, empathy can benefit interpersonal 
relationships as well. When you are able to empathize with other people, 
you know how to manage yourself around the other person. Think back to 
the example about your child breaking your father’s watch—you could see 
that your child was upset and feeling guilty about the situation, and being 
able to see the look in your child’s eyes helped to remind you to ensure that 
you did not snap at them or judge them in a way that would be harmful to 


them. You self-regulated in direct response to empathizing with your child. 


Another example of this could be in action having a discussion with 
someone. Perhaps you are trying to figure out how best to make something 
work. Your partner keeps suggesting things, but you shoot down each and 
every one of her ideas. You continue to shut them down simply because 
they do not make sense given the context, and in doing so, you effectively 
end up stressing her out. You can see that she is starting to get stressed out, 
and you can feel those familiar pangs of empathy, and you are able to 
realize what is going on: You are causing the stress. You are being too 


controlling and need to somehow otherwise regulate what you are doing. 


You then are able to scale it back and make several concessions for your 
partner, allowing your partner to stop stressing out nearly as much. When 
you do this, you make sure that your partner is taken care of. You ensure 
that your partner feels valued instead of stressed out. In being able to 


recognize that your own emotions were causing some serious stress or other 


negative emotion in someone else, you can begin to pull it back and ensure 


that you do not continue to behave in harmful ways. 


Emotional Intelligence and Communication 


Emotional intelligence also has a significant impact on communication 
abilities. This makes sense—you cannot possibly be influential if you have 
no manner through which to communicate somehow with other people. 
With the increased awareness of how your own emotional feelings can alter 
your speaking and body language patterns, you can then begin to monitor 
this. If you know that you are stressed out, you may be able to use your 
emotional intelligence skills to ensure that you are actively behaving in 
ways that will serve you well. You will be able to take that extra pause to 


communicate clearly because you are aware of your tendencies. 


Communication then gets more effective simply because you are able to 
better regulate yourself. You know that you are speaking too rapidly 
because you are stressed out, so you manually take control and deliberately 
speak in a slower, more controlled manner. Doing this takes away the power 


of your anxiety in the first place, allowing you to communicate clearly. 


Ultimately, just as developing emotional intelligence was critical in the 
building of empathy, it is critical in communication settings as well. You 
must be able to be emotionally intelligent if you want to communicate in 
the most effective manner possible. Remember, the best way to keep 
yourself levelheaded when stressed out is by making a point to take a deep 


breath in and out before speaking to answer the question. 


As one final note, remember that you can use your emotions to your benefit. 
You can leverage your emotions to allow you to communicate clearly. 


Remember, your emotions are not a sign of weakness, nor do they require 


total elimination. There are times and places to utilize your emotions, and if 
you find that the current situation is an appropriate one, you should 
absolutely make use of those emotions yourself. Doing so allows you to 
make your point even clearer, and if your emotions are appropriate ones to 
whatever the situation that you are communicating about, your own display 
of emotions can help you further emphasize your point and how passionate 


you are. 


Chapter 4: Emotions and 
Psychological State 


Emotional states are critical to understand when you are talking about 
person-to-person contact. Emotions can strongly complicate nearly 
everything about your interaction with someone else, changing how they 
are approached. When you approach your psychological state at any point 
in time with your emotions, you find that the emotions are always 


constantly interfering with it. 


Your emotions are constantly in a state of fluctuation, just due to the nature 
of emotions themselves. They are always changing from person to person, 
and that is important to keep in mind. When you are well aware of the fact 
that your emotions will always be directly interacting with your mind and 


your behaviors. 


Imagine that you were already feeling pretty annoyed as you got onto the 
road to drive home from work. You were already frustrated, and because of 
that, as you drove, when someone else cuts you off, you slam on your horn 
angrily. Angrily honking at the person, you try to pass them just to be done 
with it, but the other person interprets it as an attempt to race. They speed 
up to block you from crossing past them, and that was enough to make the 


situation worse. 


At the end of the day, you almost get into an accident before swerving off of 
that main road and onto another street altogether, swearing and raging 


angrily. You then get home and are incredibly short with your children and 


partner, all because you are already in that combative mindset, and you end 


up upsetting the people who were simply happy to have you come home. 


The Purpose of Emotions 


Emotions themselves have two primary purposes—they allow for nonverbal 
communication, which is critical on its own, and they allow for the constant 
motivation to keep you alive. Effectively, your emotions exist because your 
unconscious mind needs a method through which to interact with the world 


around it. 


Keeping in mind that the mind has two distinct parts, the conscious and 
unconscious, it is important to recognize that the two rarely, if ever, 
communicate with each other. They are unable to actively and reliably 
communicate between the two of them, and because of that, they are not 


always as effective as they could be. 


The unconscious mind seeks to guide behavior—it takes care of anything 
throughout your day that does not require any attention, such as paying 
attention to what you need to do, how you need to do it, and making sure 
that you are able to do what you need to do without wasting the space of 


your conscious mind. 


Think for a moment about how your conscious mind is directly responsible 
for your perceptions and conscious decisions—it takes care of the heavy 
lifting and anything that does require attention. For example, take into 
consideration the act of writing an email—your conscious mind is able to 
decide exactly what you wish to write, while your unconscious mind takes 
care of the active typing that you do in order to put the point across 


appropriately. This means that your unconscious mind does the more menial 


of the tasks—paying attention to how you are typing and manually 


controlling your fingers, so you do not have to. 


The unconscious mind is typically the quicker of the two simply because it 
is automatic. It happens without the conscious mind having the opportunity 
to influence it. You simply do what it is expecting you to do. Of course, you 
can consciously override it if you know what you are about to do, but for 


the most part, you are not going to see that happen. 


Now, writing an email is relatively low-stakes—it does not matter much if 
you make a typo because all you need to do is correct it. However, imagine 
that we are considering a more dangerous situation. Perhaps you are driving 
down the road when a truck suddenly veers into your path in traffic. You 
slam on your brakes to avoid hitting them before you even realize what is 


happening—your unconscious mind was responsible. 


Communication 


At this point, it is time to look at emotions more in-depth in terms of a 
mode of communication. When you feel an emotion, your body naturally 
changes in response. You may feel yourself shrinking inward when you are 
nervous, hunching over and cursing your arms to protect yourself. You may 


find yourself actively attempting to avoid eye contact. 


This directly tells everyone around you a very specific message—you are 
uncomfortable and closed off. Your own behaviors actively tell other people 
that you are trying to avoid interaction and that you wish to be left alone. 


This is your way of communicating nonverbally. 


Nonverbal communication encompasses so much of the way that we 
communicate with other people. It takes into consideration body language, 
such as how close or far away from others you are willing to get, to how 
likely you are to make any concessions in how you approach someone else. 
What is particularly critical to remember is that when you are interacting 
with other people, you need to consider the fact that their body language is 
incredibly telling, and that is because their body language tells of their 


emotions. 


Think for a moment about cognitive behavioral therapy. If you are not 
familiar with this therapy, it is a combination of cognitive therapy and 
behavioral therapy. It looks at the fact that thoughts influence emotions, 
emotions influence behaviors, and behaviors then reinforce thoughts. This 


means that if you can read the body language, you can analyze in order to 


identify the emotion being felt. If you can figure out which emotion is being 
felt at any given moment, you can then begin to figure out why that emotion 
is being felt in the first place, allowing you better access to the mind of 
others. This will allow you to gain valuable feedback that you otherwise 
would not have access to. When you understand the mindset of someone 
else, then you are better able to interact with the people. You can make it a 
point to behave in ways that you know are conducive to the behavior that 
you want because you know about this cycle of thoughts, feelings, and 
behavior, and you recognize that your own body language allows for 


communication back toward the other person. 


Motivators 


Now, let’s look at your emotions as motivators—consider how, when you 
were in danger, driving on the road, you slammed on your brakes without 
being conscious of doing so. This is because, for that moment, in your 
extreme state of emotion, your unconscious mind took hold. It was able to 
guide you through the process of slamming on that brake to protect yourself 
because the unconscious mind is largely dedicated to keeping you alive and 


functional. You need to be able to protect yourself in order to stay alive. 


Your emotions work when your unconscious mind feels the need to actively 
intervene in a process or attempt to do something. Effectively, the emotions 
are designed to skew you toward the behaviors that make the most sense for 
your own given situation. Think about how you would feel if someone 
continually harassed you at work—you would be angry. This is a direct 
response to not having your need for boundaries met. Your boundaries were 


repeatedly being crossed, and no matter how much you tried to tell the 


person kindly to leave you alone, you found that the boundary breeches 
kept happening over and over again, so you eventually gave up hope of 
getting through to the person and snapped at them. You were motivated by 


your anger to enforce your own boundaries that were being disregarded. 


Each of your primary emotions serve a very specific motivational purpose 
—they guide you toward some sort of behavior set in order to make sure 
that your basic interpersonal needs are met. You are able to enforce that you 
need, for example, for someone to help you when you are afraid or sad. You 
communicate something clear: There is something wrong, and there may 
even pOtentially be some level of danger that must be given the proper 


consideration as well. 


When you keep emotions as a motivator in mind, they start to become 
incredibly easy to understand. When you feel angry, you know that you are 
having some sort of boundary broken, and it is frustrating you. When you 
feel sad, you know it is because something is hurting you, and you feel the 


need to fight back against it or to get support, and so on. 


However, in modern-day, many times, the situations that trigger our 
emotions do not line up so much with what used to say they were developed 
in nature. You may feel scared, but that fear is coming from a place of 
fearing losing something rather than a fear of death or otherwise being 
threatened. Effectively, you will react with fear to a situation that does not 
actually warrant such a strong reaction. For example, having someone 
comment something cruel on your social media page is different than 


feeling truly threatened by the situation at hand as if you were staring down 


the mouth of a cougar or some other animal that was primarily determined 


to eat and kill you. 


This means that most of the time, your emotional impulses are usually gross 
ovetreactions to what they otherwise should have been. You do not need to 
react like someone is trying to kill you if they are simply telling you that 
they disagree with you, nor do you need to actively attack and fight to the 
death over some sort of misunderstanding or who gets that last pack of 


toilet paper at the grocery store. 


Of course, that does not, by any means, mean that your emotions are 
unimportant or should not be considered. Your emotions are critical in 
several contexts, and being able to recognize your emotions can help you 
know exactly how you are feeling at any given moment. What is important, 
however, is knowing when to put that distance between yourself and what is 
happening, and when those emotional impulses developed over millennia of 


survival of the fittest in nature are actually appropriate to act upon. 


The Cause of Emotions 


Despite the attempts to explain the cause of emotions, ranging from the 
spirits and passions of old philosophical psychology all the way to 
assuming that it is some sort of hormonal event, the only constant between 
everyone’s explanations of what causes emotions is that there is no 
definitive answer. In fact, there are six major theories on what causes 
people to have emotions in the first place and what triggers them. Within 
this section, we will address all six of these theories, allowing you to come 
up with your own explanation and theory upon hearing them. The six major 
theories of emotion are the Evolutionary Theory, the Cognitive Appraisal 
Theory, the Facial-Feedback Theory, the James-Lange Theory, the Cannon- 
Bard Theory, and the Schacter-Singer Theory. 


Ultimately, these theories can be understood in three ways—as being 
physiological in nature, asserting that the body is what causes emotions, 
being neurological in theory, asserting that the brain is responsible for 
emotions, and being cognitive in theory, asserting that thoughts and mental 


states are influential over emotions. 


Physiological Neurological A n IS 
p Cognitive theories 
theories theories 


+ Body's responses + Brain activity + Thoughts cause 
cause emotions causes emotions emotions 


Evolutionary Theory 


Starting off with Charles Darwin, the Evolutionary Theory states that 


emotions exist to keep animals capable of survival and reproduction. 


Effectively, we feel some positive emotions to lead toward mating, while 
other emotions encourage people to fight or run away. Ultimately, within 
this theory, emotions are adaptive—they are motivating and allow for quick 


responses to the environment. 


Understanding how emotions work in others also allows for adaptive 
survival—when you are able to understand the feelings of others, you can 
effectively make sure that you are capable of protecting yourself. For 
example, if you know that feeling angry makes people volatile and prepared 
to fight back if the need arises, you may see someone showing defensive or 
aggressive behaviors and intentionally distance yourself from them. You 
will effectively ensure that you stay safe and comfortable because you are 
making it a point to avoid encouraging any behaviors that could become 
problematic for you. You are able to effectively respond because you 


understand the emotional signs of the other animal or person. 


Cognitive Appraisal Theory 


Within appraisal theories, it becomes clear that thinking must happen prior 
to an emotion occurring. Effectively, within a series of events that will 
trigger an emotion, the thought that happens after the stimulus is what 
determines the emotions. Think about how you may be absolutely terrified 
at the sight of a spider, but someone else is more than happy to walk around 
with their pet tarantula hanging out on their shoulder. The reason that you 
may be terrified by a spider that brings someone else great joy is the 


thought processes behind it. 


The Facial-Feedback Theory 


It has been noted over the years that sometimes, the body’s responses do 
have a direct impact on emotions instead of being a consequence of that 
emotion. Some people take this to the extreme—they assume that it is the 
changes in the facial muscles, then, that caused emotions. Think about how 
if you have to smile at someone, eventually, you start actually having a 
better time than you otherwise would have. This is because you are 
engaging with your facial muscles and your facial muscles are directly 


responsible. 


This may seem far-fetched to some, but consider that both Charles Darwin 
and William James, who you will hear more about momentarily, both 
recognized that link between physical and emotional. Because of backers by 
people like Darwin and James, people who believe in these theories, the 


facial-feedback theory did manage to become one of the more well-known. 


James-Lange Theory 


Of all, however, perhaps the best known theory of the cause of emotions is 
the James-Lange theory. In particular, this theory was developed by the 
psychologist, William James, and the physiologist Carl Lange. Together, the 
two pieced together a theory that stated that emotional responses are born 


from a result of physiological reactions to events. 


This may seem complicated but consider for a moment what happens when 
you see a wolf or a bear or another predator staring you down from your 
yard. Most likely, you will feel your heart rate quicken. You will notice that 


your body seems to shake and run cold. Your breathing pattern changes. 


These physiological responses, then, must be interpreted somehow. After 
all, think about how similar several of those sensations are to extreme 
excitement as well? If you are extremely excited, you will also feel your 


heart rate and breathing increase. 


The James-Lange theory says, then, that the only difference between your 
feeling of a racing heart being for excitement or for terror is how you think 
about it. You are essentially set to interpret your physiological response, and 
then that provides your emotion. Instead of feeling your heart race because 


you are scared, you feel scared because your heart is actively racing. 


Physical Interpretation 
Response of Response 


The Cannon-Bard Theory 


Another common theory is known as the Cannon-Bard theory—and this 
one is set out to show disagreement with the James-Lange theory. 
Effectively, because it is entirely possible and expected that people will 
have physiological responses for various reasons, it is impossible to say that 
it is solely the physical that determines the emotional. Further, because 
emotional states are so rapid, it is impossible for them to be a result of 
physical changes. After all, we feel the emotion immediately with the 
symptoms—if the physical came first, then there would be a slight lag in 
the onset of the emotion and the physiological reaction. 

In order to address these issues with the James-Lange theory of emotion, 
the Cannon-Bard theory was born. Within this theory, Cannon suggests that 


your emotions are a result of the thalamus within the brain to respond to 


some sort of stimulus. That one message gets sent out and triggers the 
emotional experience while also triggering the physiological at the same 


time. Effectively, the one message gets interpreted in two different ways. 


For example, imagine that you walk out to your car, only to find a bear 
staring at you. Your body takes in the stimulus—you register visually being 
aware of the bear. Yoru thalamus then seeks to respond to the bear. In 
response, the message from the thalamus makes you feel terrified, while 
simultaneously creating your sensations of fear—you feel shaky and 


nervous, for example. You feel your heart race. You want to run. 


Schachter-Singer Theory 


Emotional 
and physical 
response 


Thalamus 
sends 
message 


The final theory that we will address is the Schacter-Singer theory, also 
known commonly as the two-factor theory. This is a cognitive theory in 
which the physiological response must occur first prior to the creation of an 
emotion. In response to the physiological, then you must figure out why 
that arousal is happening and then label it yourself. Effectively, only then 
can you figure out the emotion. 


This theory is quite similar to the Cannon-Bard and the James-Lange 
theories, drawing from both to create a new one to explain the working of 
emotions. Consider first how the James-Lange theory proposes that the 
emotions are based upon inferences from the physical reaction to a stimulus 


and how the Schachter-Singer theory mirrors that. Both the James-Lange 


and Schachter-Singer model point out that people make those inferences 
from physical to emotional, using a cognitive interpretation. 

In regards to the Cannon-Bard theory, the two both agree that the same 
physical reaction can cause several different emotions. For example, you 
can acknowledge one particular sensation, such as trembling, as fear in one 
situation when you are staring down the bear, but sometimes, trembling can 


be a direct result of your own excitement for something. 


So, if the Schachter-Singer model involves a physical response being 
cognitively interpreted, imagine that you have just walked outside, and that 
bear is sitting there, staring at you. You notice that you start to shake and 
that your heart is pounding. You look at the bear and acknowledge that the 
bear’s presence is what is causing you to feel these signs of arousal—you 
are hyper-aware of the bear’s presence. You must then understand what the 
sight of the bear means—you acknowledge and recognize that the bear’s 
presence would be deemed to be a threat, and you respond accordingly. You 
acknowledge that the bear’s presence is a threat and that the threat should 
be met with feelings of fear. Thus, you determine that the trembling and 


racing heart that you felt in response to seeing the bear is fear. 


Memfrston Thought 2 bout 
Phys ioleg Co 
horton of the cause of the ae of 
feacton the reacton 


The Universal Emotions 


Along with all of the ways that emotions could possibly be caused, another 
common point to contend with is whether emotions are universal. It is 
currently believed that emotions that you feel, from being pleasantly 
surprised, to moderately irritated, to even feeling guilty, all come from what 
are known as the seven universal emotions. These seven emotions are sort 
of families for others and many of the emotions that people know and 
recognize come as a series of several of these emotions. The seven 
universal emotions are anger, contempt, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, and 
surprise. Any other emotions exist somewhere on the spectrum within those 


confines. 


Each of these seven emotions convey very important messages for those 
present around them. They convey some sort of need that is unmet, or in the 
case of happiness, a lack of unmet needs altogether. Understanding the 
needs that these emotions convey aids dramatically in the managing of 
relationships with others. These emotions are determined to be universal 
because they are recognizable, no matter where the individual that is 
exposed to them is from. They are effectively a way to communicate that 
seems to be innate—in fact, even people who have grown up blind still 


convey body language related to these seven emotions. 


Anger 


Anger as an emotion is strongly motivational. It is a response that is 
incredibly intense and is meant to be used as a response to perceiving a 


threat of some sort. When you experience anger, you are usually conveying 


to other people that you are feeling threatened—you are saying that you 


have a need for defense or boundaries. 


Contempt 


Contempt is incredibly close to anger—it is a feeling that whatever you are 
looking at or dealing with is beneath you to some degree. You show that it 
is worthless to you effectively. It is to treat other people or a thing with 
disregard or disdain—effectively, you are saying that you do not respect 
that other person or what that other person is doing. This is showing a need 
for space from the other person—you are effectively disgusted by the 


presence of that other person. 


Disgust 


Disgust is that feeling you get when you look at something repulsive. If you 
have ever smelled a foul diaper or opened a pack of food only to find that it 
is covered in mold, you have probably experienced disgust to some degree. 
When you feel disgust toward something, you are feeling an intense need to 
get away from something—likely because it poses a threat to your health 
and safety. You feel disgust to keep you from eating something moldy or 
toxic; for example—the smell or look is enough to sort of turn your 


stomach and discourage you from continuing. 


Fear 


Fear is the feeling you get when you are exposed to something that is a 


significant threat to you—it leads to either the fight or flight response, and 


as a response, you either feel afraid, which will cause you to flee, or your 
fear shifts over to anger instead and you move into the fight response. Fear 
is a necessary emotion to keep you safe—it encourages you to defend 
yourself by conveying a need to protect or defend. It tells other people that 


you have a need for safety that you need help meeting. 


Joy 


Joy is the state of feeling happy or calm with what is happening. You feel 
comfortable in your surroundings, and you are content with what is going 
on, or you are even enjoying yourself and what is happening. When you are 
experiencing joy, you are experiencing a lack of needs. All of your needs 


have been met, and you are enjoying yourself. 


Sadness 


Sadness is felt for a very important reason—it is meant to be adaptive. 
Sadness has very real purposes that are integral for a happy life, as 
contradictory as it seems. It reminds you to pay attention to what brings 
meaning to your life. It tells you that you should appreciate what you have. 
It allows you to feel centered and grounded and also encourages resilience. 
It shows that you have a need for support, and it reminds people to provide 


that help and resilience for you. 


Surprise 


Finally, surprise brings with it the need to pay attention to something. It 
shows some sort of disconnect between your expectations and what you had 
in front of you. You may have expected one thing, only to find that your 
expectations were entirely avoided altogether. Effectively, then, you feel the 
need to pay closer attention to whatever is happening around you to figure 
out what is going on with it. This also signals to others as well to pay closer 
attention as whatever is happening is deviating from the expected. 


Emotions, Moods, and Feelings 


Finally, as we wrap up this chapter, it is time to pay special attention to the 
difference between emotions, feelings, and moods. Despite the fact that we 
may refer to all three of them as the same thing, they are all distinctly 
different from each other. Your feelings and emotions are different, as are 
your moods. While they are closely related to each other, you must be able 
to recognize the inherent differences as well, especially considering that 


they become quite relevant to understand later on. 


Overall, however, the primary difference is time. Time take something from 
an emotion to a feeling and from a feeling to a mood. Effectively, the three 


work together with similar sensations, but they do have differing purposes. 


Emotions are believed to be the chemical response to the trigger and is 
nearly instantaneous. The brain is able to understand the stimulus and 
trigger the chemicals necessary within about half a second. These chemicals 
go throughout the body, which is why many of your emotions also directly 
impact your body as well. These emotions last for roughly six seconds 


before the initial emotion fades. 


Feelings, then, are the integration of the emotion. We understand the 
emotion that was felt and begin to understand it. We feel both physically, 
such as when you dip your foot in hot water and feel that it is hot, and we 
feel emotionally as well, such as in response to a strong emotion. As 
opposed to the emotions, which were pushed forward by the brain and 


chemicals, feelings are cognitive. They are usually several emotions coming 


together, along with the thoughts surrounding. They are also longer-lasting, 


but still not permanent. 


Finally, moods are general sensations. They are your general state at any 
given time. When you are in a good mood, then you are feeling mostly 
good about yourself and what is happening. You are generally calm and 
relaxed, for example, and you are likely to be more patient. When you are 
in a bad mood, on the other hand, you may find that you have no patience 


whatsoever to deal with anything. 


Chapter 5: Managing Thoughts and Regulating 


Emotions 


Imagine that you were heading through the grocery store to pick up some 
last-minute items before you go home for dinner. It is the Friday before the 
following Thanksgiving, and you know that the store will be packed. You 
have already had a bad day and were already feeling impatient. Let’s really 
set the stage here—you have two sick children at home, and your third child 
just got suspended. Your car died earlier in the day and you are overall just 


at the end of your rope. You cannot put up with anything else going wrong. 


Of course, however, despite feeling like you cannot deal with anything else, 
you find out that 2/3 things that you went to the store for are , in fact, sold 
out, and you cannot get them. You needed them for your big holiday dinner, 
and without them, you cannot possibly finish the meal. Perhaps it was the 
big main dish that is missing—perhaps there is no turkey left to buy. You 
lose it right there. You yell at the attendant who had just asked if there is 
anything that you needed. You tell him that you are furious that they do not 
have any turkeys when it is Thanksgiving, and you cannot believe that the 
store dropped the ball so badly. You completely unload on this poor, 16- 
year-old grocery store shelf stocker who does nothing but make sure that 


there is food on the shelves. 


In reality, it is not the employee’s fault—he is not the one responsible for 
the lack of turkeys. Sure, the store could have ordered more, but in reality, 
the only one to blame for the lack of turkey at that point is you. You could 
have gone earlier in the week to get one, which would have made much 


more sense. You could have tried going to another store to get one, but you 


were too tired to continue driving around everywhere. You could have done 
plenty of different things, but at the end of the day, you chose instead to yell 
at a poor teenaged employee who probably had better things to be doing at 


that point in time. 


In this example, it is a sign of struggling with emotional regulation. It is 
okay to feel furious at your situation, but what is not acceptable is deciding 
to take it out on some random, innocent person who had nothing to do with 
what you were feeling. As much as it can make you feel better to yell at 
someone else, it is not particularly healthy to do so. It is not fair to the 
employee that you yelled at, nor is it a solid method of managing your own 


emotions. 


Being able to self-regulate is a critical skill for everyone to learn—adults 
and children alike. When you can self-regulate, you can keep yourself from 
responding negatively, such as in the instance above. You know how to deal 
with your emotions and allow them to be felt in a manner that is healthy and 
actually conducive to solving the problem. Instead of screaming, you could 
have chosen to go to another store, for example, or asked when they are 


getting more turkey in, rather than risking getting permanently banned. 


Of course, there is more to self-regulation than just managing emotions, as 
well—you can also manage your thoughts to manage yourself as well. 
When you are able to manage your thoughts, you are able to regulate 
yourself as well. Think back to how your own thoughts could alter how you 
register your emotions—if you feel like your emotions are going to be 
skewed by your thoughts, you may need to change the thought to ensure 


that it does not happen. For example, you may want to manage your 


thoughts surrounding your current phobia in order to avoid your emotions 


from being problematic. 


As we go over this chapter, you will be learning about several situations in 
which you may need to manage your thoughts. You will learn about 
negative thoughts and cognitive distortions and how these thoughts need to 
be mitigated due to their tendency to have negative impacts on your 
emotional state. You will learn about how to manage thoughts, looking at 
using both cognitive behavioral therapy and emotional intelligence to help 
you do so. You will then focus specifically on emotional regulation, 
understanding what it entails and why it should happen. Finally, as this 
chapter comes to a close, you will look at several techniques that are used to 


manage thoughts and regulate emotions. 


By the time that you have finished this chapter, you should feel comfortable 
with the idea of regulating both your emotions and your thoughts. In doing 
so, you will find that there is a positive impact on your life. You will feel 
more capable of handling yourself in difficult or negative situations. You 
will feel more in control of yourself, and you will find that even your most 


strained relationships of the past will actually become more easily managed. 


When Thoughts Require Management 


Have you ever had a thought, and then moments later wished that you had 
not had a thought like it? Perhaps you had a thought that triggered you to 
act, such as the example in the grocery store, in which you were so 
overwhelmed with your day that you lashed out emotionally at everyone 
present. After the fact, as you sat in your car and gathered your thoughts, 
you may have felt embarrassed or like you wish you had managed the 


situation much better than before. 


We all have thoughts from time to time that are problematic. You may get 
down on yourself for messing up something that you thought was extra 
important, such as telling yourself that you are useless for failing. You may 
find that you were stuck thinking in what you will soon come to recognize 
as a cognitive distortion—thinking that is illogical and problematic and 


therefore should be disregarded. 


While it is normal to have these thoughts from time to time, it is critical to 
make sure that you are able to recognize them so they can be corrected. You 
need to be able to regulate, reminding yourself that these thoughts that you 
are having are not conducive to being happy or successful, and for that 
reason, you should disregard them. This section seeks to identify both 
negative thoughts and negative emotions, so you know how to handle 
yourself. In learning to do so, you can counter them before they can get out 


of hand once and for all. 


Negative thoughts 


Have you ever walked into a situation while immediately wondering what 
will happen if you fail? Perhaps you talk yourself out of trying to do 
something because you are convinced that your attempt will always be a 
failure. No matter how much you try to convince yourself otherwise, you 
get caught up in the thoughts of negativity—your thoughts are rooted in 
can’ts and won’ts, and despite even acknowledging that your current 


thinking is far too negative, you cannot help but continue on. 


Ultimately, negative thinking is any thinking that is inherently locked into 
functioning form a place of fear. It is negative and dangerous, and no matter 
what you attempt to do to erase it, you find that it keeps coming back. The 
apprehension that you feel that drives these thoughts directly challenges 
you—it keeps you back, convincing you that you cannot actually get 
through the processes that you need. It makes you feel like you are 
worthless, leaving you to feel guilty because you believe that you are 
incapable, while simultaneously feeling guilty for never trying in the first 


place. 


These negative thoughts are largely contagious—they can be based on what 
should be or what must be, effectively creating some sort of obligation. You 
should be able to do that, or you must make sure that you finish that work 
before the deadline, and if you are unable to do so, then there is a problem. 
This sort of logic is problematic—it sort of forces you into this impossible 
situation in which you think you have to do something a certain way, and 
anything beyond that certain way is failing. When you are caught up in 
negative thoughts, you find that you repeat them over and over again. You 
have a thought, which causes guilt, which causes inaction, which reinforces 
the thought, causing further guilt. 


Most often, these occur because of a fear of some sort. You may be afraid of 
failing or afraid of venturing into unknown territory if you are entirely 
unfamiliar with the situation that you are entering. This causes problems, 
especially as the thoughts become automatic and repeated without effort. 
This leads you to sort of attempt to do better, but really get caught up in 


inaction instead, creating the aforementioned cycle. 


Cognitive Distortions 


Those negative thoughts mentioned are just one form of cognitive 
distortions. Cognitive distortions themselves refer to any sort of 
exaggerated thought pattern that is frequently quite irrational. In being 
irrational, you often see problems related to them. You may have a thought 
about how things must o a certain way, and when they do not, you struggle 
to compensate. Alternatively, you may think in another way that leads you 
to feel like you understand exactly what is going through the mind of the 
person you are attempting to interact with. You assume that you know, even 
though you have no true way to do so. These sorts of thoughts are known as 
cognitive distortions, and oftentimes, if a thought falls into any of the 
distortions that are being listed here, you know that you can disregard them 
altogether. 


To better understand this, think of proper logic. There are several forms of 
logic, known as fallacies, that are simply inaccurate. They cannot possibly 
be used because they simply do not make sense in formal logic. No matter 


how hard you may attempt to justify something in logic with a fallacy, it 


will still never be any more valid as a form of argument. The cognitive 


distortions that you are likely to encounter at any point in time are: 


e The need to always be right: This thinking assumes that it is 
impossible to be wrong. Effectively, when you fall for this 
thought process, you try to justify your own thoughts and feelings 
at all costs, looking for literally any way that you can possibly 
force what you have asserted as being true, even if it involves you 


looking strange as you do it. 


e Casting blame: When you use this distortion, you find that 
everyone else is held responsible for what they do wrong, and you 
are quick to remind them of this. You effectively always fault 
other people, even when, in reality, you would not push the idea 


so much. 


e Ignoring positivity: When you use this distortion, you are 
effectively completely disregarding anything positive that occurs. 
Even if something good happened to you in the course of a day, 


you would sooner focus on how everything that day went wrong. 


e Emotional reasoning: This particular form of reasoning is 
incredibly problematic. When you engage in emotional reasoning, 
you effectively allow your own emotional states to determine 
your thoughts on something. If you feel happy about something, 
you assume that it is positive, even if it is not necessarily the right 
choice for you. This is the sort of logic that lands you with a car 
payment you are struggling to afford simply because the thought 


of driving the car felt good, so you chose to get it. 


Change fallacy: With this distortion, you find that you rely on 
social control to get other people to cooperate. Effectively, you 
try to browbeat people into doing what you want or need, using 


pressure or other techniques to do so. 


Fairness fallacy: When you fall into this distortion, you are often 
making the assumption that things must be fair at all costs, and if 
they are not, you feel like something was unfair and, therefore, 
wrong. You feel like life, in general, should be fair, despite the 
fact that life is inherently unfair, and you then use your emotions 
about the unfairness of the situation as your reasoning for how 


you have behaved 


Jumping to conclusions: When you do this, you usually arrive at 
some sort of conclusion with absolutely no support for that 
thought process. Typically, it involves one of two forms of 
jumping to conclusions. You may engage in mind reading in 
which you assume that you know what the other party is thinking. 
You assume that their thoughts are negative, even when they may 
not be. This leads to you behaving according to how you assume 
the other people will, which can be a big problem if you are 
assuming that the other party is intentionally being negative or 
problematic. The other form of jumping to conclusions involves 
fortune-telling—when you are fortune-telling, you assume that 
you know how something will play out. You assume that the 


ending will be negative and act accordingly. 


Labeling: When you label someone, you are overgeneralizing— 
you effectively assume that someone’s actions are directly 


indicative of someone’s character. For example, if someone 


accidentally made a mistake, you may assume that they are 


generally quite incompetent and leave it at that. 


Minimizing: When you are minimizing something, you are 
intentionally downplaying it—you are trying to make it sound 
like it is less negative or problematic than it actually is. For 
example, you may tell yourself that whatever you have done well 
is not actually as good or beneficial to you as you thought it was 
initially. 

Catastrophizing: Sometimes, you go the opposite direction from 
minimizing—when you _ catastrophize, instead of making 
something smaller, you magnify it into something far worse than 
it actually is. You effectively make the situation out to be as 


terrible as possible. 


Overgeneralization: when you engage in this distortion, you find 
that you are making decisions and generalization without enough 
evidence one way or the other. You may assume that if your 
friend cancels plans with you due to life reasons, they do not like 
you, or they wish that you would stop inviting or taking them 


places. 


Personalization: When you personalize, you take everything 
personal. You allow yourself to be responsible for everything, 
whether good or bad, even if realistically, you had no true control 


or influence over what has happened. 


Must statements: When you do this, you focus on what must or 
should—this is expecting things to be different instead of 
attempting to change or better accommodate for what has 


happened. 


e Dichotomous thinking: Finally, when you use dichotomous 
thinking, you think that everything is in extremes. It is either 
perfect or a failure. It is either always or never. When you do this, 
you fail to acknowledge all of the colors of grey that lay between 


the extremes. 


Managing Thoughts 

If you believe that your mind may be run by these negative sorts of 
thoughts, it may be important to begin to manage them. If you are able to 
manage your own thoughts, you can begin to manage your behaviors as 
well, and that is incredibly important most of the time. If you could have 
managed your emotions, you never would have blown up at the grocery 
store employee, for example—you would have accepted what had happened 
and moved on instead. 

Managing thoughts can keep you calm when you are in the face of stress. It 
can make you more reliable and capable of protecting yourself. When you 
are able to manage your thoughts, you ensure that you are able to make the 
best in nearly any situation. Making the best of the situation is sometimes 
the best that you can do, and without it, you may feel weighed down upon 
or otherwise incapable. This is why managing your thoughts can be so 


incredibly beneficial. 


Ultimately, there are several methods through which you can manage the 
thoughts of others. The two that will be focused upon, however, are 
managing through emotional intelligence and managing through cognitive 
restructuring, a common technique used within cognitive-behavioral 


therapy. 


Managing thoughts with CBT 


Cognitive restructuring is a common exercise within CBT—it is done in 
order to identify any problematic thoughts that you have, such as your 
negative thoughts or cognitive distortions, and then find some sort of 


method that you can use to tackle them. Usually, the technique is designed 


to override through constant thought challenging or otherwise making 


oneself into an unreliable judge of the situation at hand. 


For example, imagine that you are terrified of finding help form other 
people. Just the act of having to ask someone else for help is enough to 
leave you absolutely terrified. When this happens, you will find that even 
asking for help in an emergency is nearly impossible. You struggle to ever 
actively address those that may be in a position to help you, and because of 


that, you are failing far more than you should be. 


Of course, this fear of asking for help leads to constant failure. You do not 
ask, and then as a natural consequence, you fail. This is problematic—you 
cannot get through life constantly failing. For that reason, you decide that 
you will use cognitive restructuring to help defend yourself. You then focus 
on identifying the thoughts responsible for that fear of asking for help so 
you can directly target them. You may make it a point to tell yourself that 
your thought process is flawed because it hits the distortion list, for 
example, and therefore, it does not matter. It may involve other methods 
such as constant reinforcement through constant repetition, effectively 
drilling the thought into the mind of someone else. No matter the method 
that you use, what holds true is that you should be able to change the 


thoughts that you have in order to protect yourself in the future. 


Managing thoughts with emotional intelligence 


Compared to cognitive behavioral therapy, the methods of thought control 
within emotional intelligence may seem a bit vaguer and less intuitive. In 
particular, you will find that when you must fix your negative thoughts with 
emotional intelligence, you are actively making it a point to prevent them 
from happening in the first place. You may use methods such as 
affirmations and cognitive restructuring, or you may find that you are better 


off with other methods instead to best defend yourself. 


When you use emotional intelligence to regulate your thoughts, you are 
effectively making sure that your thoughts are healthy by learning to bypass 
the negative ones. Yes, the negative thoughts must be defeated in any way 
possible. However, you must also keep in mind that it is incredibly 
important for you to make it a point to defend against them as well. 


Emotional intelligence is so incredibly effective with these forms of thought 
because of the fact that emotional intelligence teaches discipline and 
control. When you are learning to be emotionally intelligent, you are 
learning to be resilient, capable of any change that comes your way, and 


more. You effectively figure out how best to get around poor or negative 
emotions by learning to recognize that, as negative thoughts, they deserve 
no more consideration than they have already had by the time they have 
been acknowledged in the first place. You are able to remind yourself that 
you should not, in fact, give in to your every whim and thought, and instead 
make sure that you are able to see past the impulses and toward the goals 


that you have set out for yourself. 


Emotional Regulation 


Emotional regulation occurs largely the same way no matter which method 
you choose—emotional intelligence or cognitive behavioral therapy. 
However, what is important to note is that when you choose to use 
emotional regulation, you are not completely disregarding the emotions that 
you are having at any given moment. Remember, feeling emotions is 
incredibly important and incredibly powerful. Rather than not feeling 
emotions, you focus on how to regulate—you are making it a point to learn 
how best to target your feelings and ensure that they do not get in your way 


rather than telling yourself that what you are feeling is wrong. 


For example, imagine that you are upset at the grocery store all over again. 
It is okay to be upset—what was not okay was effectively blowing up on 
someone who was entirely unrelated to the person that was there with you. 
Rather than moving on like nothing important went wrong, you are 
choosing to acknowledge that a problem has occurred, and then you are 
better able to begin to figure out how to control the emotions that caused it 
in the first place. 

A 


Perhaps the better name for this is to build up emotional tolerance—when 
you are engaging in emotional regulation, you continue to feel all of the 
major emotions. The only difference is that you have learned to be mindful 
—you have learned to be conscientious of the entire concept having to 
avoid emotions at all. Instead, you allow those emotions to be felt and learn 
from them. There is always something more that you can learn from 


someone or a Situation if you really look for it. 


Managing your Thoughts and Feelings 


When you are ready to manage your thoughts, one method that is 
commonly used is through affirmations. In particular, you make it clear that 
you can manage your thoughts by repeating positive thoughts to yourself 
until you internalize and believe them. For example, imagine that you have 
just been told that you are fired due to not stocking enough turkeys—if you 
are able to manage your thoughts, you can keep yourself from spiraling into 
a depression in which you blame yourself endlessly. Instead of seeing the 


situation as your own fault, you are able to figure out what to do next. 
Affirmations 


Affirmations refer to the short statements that you will reiterate to yourself 
on a regular basis. You will use these affirmations whenever you feel like 
you are struggling in any way. For example, if you find that you cannot 
manage to get over a negative thought about your own worthlessness, you 
can come up with an affirmation that will help you directly counter it. All 
that you have to do is make sure that you are able to come up with an 
affirmation that is formed well enough to help you do so. Using 
affirmations is incredibly important to regulating your negative feelings, 


helping you to overcome them in order to keep moving forward. 


When you are making affirmations, it hopes to remember three distinct 
rules—keep it personal, keep it positive, and keep it present-oriented. If you 
can remember these three rules, you will find that even the most difficult 
and stubborn of negative thoughts can ultimately be slain like the monster it 


is. 


Present Positive $ Personal 


You must keep your affirmation personal because ultimately, at the end of 
the day, literally, the only person and situation that you have the utmost 
control over is yourself. When you are not the subject of the affirmation, 
you will find that you cannot act upon it, meaning that you cannot possibly 
ensure that the affirmation will be true at the end of the day, rendering it 


almost ineffective in the first place. 


You must make sure that your affirmation is positive—when it is not, you 
are hardly helping yourself defeat a negative thought. While a negative 
times a negative in multiplication may create a positive, that is not the case 
in real-world interactions. If you have just been cut off while driving to 
work, the right answer is not to tailgate the other party and harass them until 
the police arrive. This means that if you wish to be effective, you want to 


make sure that your affirmation is positive. 


Finally, your affirmation must be present-oriented. This means that it is 
actively true at the exact moment that it is being discussed. You must be 
able to acknowledge the truthfulness of the affirmation if you hope to use it 


for cognitive restructuring. 


When these three rules come together, you effectively create an affirmation 
that is actionable because it is present-tense and able to tackle a very 
specific problem that you may have. When they come together, you can 


find that you are more than capable of ensuring that you are encouraging a 


good state of mind because you are using positive language. Finally, you 
know that it is focused specifically on you, so you know that the thought 


that you are correcting is well within your own jurisdiction. 


Cognitive Restructuring 


Another common method to regulate is through cognitive restructuring. 
This process primarily involves four steps—you must identify the 
problematic thoughts, you must identify any distortions, you must dispute 
the distortions, and then you must develop an argument to the negative 
thoughts. If you follow these four steps, you can eventually overcome the 


negative thoughts or distortions that are present. 


Identify Identify Dispute Develop a 
automatic cognitive cognitive 
thought distortions distortion thought 


By starting with identifying, you know exactly what you will be targeting, 
and because of that, you know where your efforts are going. In figuring 
these out, you are identifying either negative thoughts or cognitive 
distortions that will be challenged. 


By identifying any of the distortions that exist, you already sort of put a 
chip in their armor. After all, if you know that something about the thoughts 
is inherently flawed, you will be able to actively protest against that thought 
process. You may be able to remind yourself of the problems in order to 
better overcome it, for example. You will be able to recognize that there is 
an inherent flaw that can help you throw out the thought altogether. After 


all, if someone came up and told you that, in their country, 2+2=6, you 


would look at them like they are crazy. It is the hope that, through 
recognizing distortions, you would give that same look to your distorted 
thoughts. 


Next, it is time to dispute the automatic thoughts. You may do this through 
actively questioning yourself and your thoughts, such as wondering how 
those particular thoughts are truthful or wondering why you would follow 


that particular train of logic in the first place. 


Finally, in developing a rational rebuttal, you are coming up with a new 
way of thinking. You are replacing the old thought with a new one here, 
offering up an alternative thought that actually makes sense. You may tell 
yourself that instead of feeling like you are worthless and then telling 
yourself that you are worthless, which is effectively just thinking with 
emotional reasoning and following it up with some degree of labeling as 


well, you tell yourself that you are trying the best that you can. 


Emotional Regulation 


Ultimately, grounding yourself is a technique that is largely personal. What 
works for you may not necessarily work for others as well, but what is 
important is that you are willing to try to see what does, in fact, work for 
you. You may find that you do best with some sort of mindfulness 
technique in order to regulate your emotions. You may feel like you need a 
breathing exercise or some other exercise altogether. What is the most 
important during this time is that you are choosing a method that feels 
comfortable for you. Ultimately, you must be comfortable enough to use 
these methods during moments of extreme duress in certain situations. For 
this reason, it is always recommended that you use these grounding 
methods several times before ever actually needing them. You want to 
ensure that you have practiced enough to ensure that you are actually 


capable of using them when they matter most. 


Grounding Method 


One such manner of grounding yourself involves the use of your 


surroundings. When you use this manner, you are effectively making sure 


that you can focus on everything around you, identifying and engaging with 
your senses in order to make sure that you are focused on what is around 


you rather than what you are doing. 


In this instance, you will engage each of your senses one at a time in order 
to sort of bring yourself down from the emotional state. Think of this as 
slowly making your way back to shore after going out too far into the 
middle of the lake. 


Starting with your vision, find five things around you that you can see. 
Make a note of each one as you do so. Then, move on to four things that 
you can hear around you. Third, you want to identify three things that you 
can touch. Fourth, you must be able to identify two things that you can 


smell. Finally, you need one more thing that you can taste. 


This serves two purposes—it distracts your mind by giving it something 
structured to look at and consider, and it also makes sure that you are able 
to regulate yourself. You effectively distract your mind from any sort of 
panic attack or troubles that you were having by using your senses as much 
as you can. 

Deep Breathing 


There is something oddly therapeutic about deep breathing—whatever it is; 
it makes it far easier for individuals to engage in changing their emotions. 
When you are using deep breathing, you are effectively activating the vagus 
nerve—a nerve that connects from the gut to the brain and is heavily 


involved in much of the physical and emotional connections. 


When you use deep breathing, your deep breaths unintentionally activate 
the vagus nerve. This is not problematic for the vast majority, and actually 
making use of this nerve is actually quite healthy. Many cultures push a 
strong emphasis on this sort of method—they actively encourage you to use 
deep breathing, such as in prayers that naturally follow the rhythm of the 


vagus nerve, or in meditation that uses long, drawn-out sounds. 


When you want to use deep breathing for emotional regulation, you 
effectively want to focus strongly on your breaths. Take in a deep breath, 
making the inhale last four seconds. As you do this, you want to count 
slowly. Hold your breath for four seconds as well before exhaling deeply 
through your mouth. When you do this, you are going to begin to feel the 
results quickly. 


This method is incredibly effective. It allows you to actively remind your 
body that you are safe and that your emotional state should not be nearly as 


volatile as it appears to be during these moments of stress. 


Chapter 6: Principles of Psychology and Your 
Relationships 


Relationships are often considered critical to humankind. Though many 
people tell you that you should live life without allowing someone else to 
define it, nearly everyone is going to naturally crave a relationship of some 
sort. As a social species, you are commonly going to be exposed to people 
and commonly desire to fit in with them as well—this is only natural. When 
you feel these urges, it can be easy to remind yourself that you do not need 
to be worrying about a relationship or that you have no interest in a 


relationship. However, the vast majority of the time, this is not true. 


You naturally want to have other people to spend your time with. You 
naturally want to ensure that you can relate to others, engaging with them, 
and living your life as happily as you possibly can. For this reason, it 
becomes important to understand the psychology behind the relationships 
that you will have. When you understand how they work psychologically, 
you will begin to figure out where any past relationships failed. If you have 
commonly run into relationships that fail, you may feel entirely discouraged 
from continuing to try to engage with them. However, if you were to engage 
in your relationships with a different mindset and attempt to approach them 
in the first place, you would find that you are actually far better off. You 
will find that your relationships will be happier and more successful, and 


this means that you, yourself, will be happier as well. 


The Psychology of Relationships 


You may be wondering why these relationships are so important to you in 
the first place—there is one particular reason for this: It is a basic human 
need. If you were to look at Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, you would see 
love and belongingness right on the list, and this is because it is a proposed 
psychological need. No matter how much you may attempt to convince 
yourself otherwise, you feel a biological need to fit in and find love. You 


will keep searching for this as much as possible as well. 


Romantic love, then, becomes one of the most important relationships that 
you have in life—in fact, you may find that your entire life is based upon 
finding such a relationship. This may seem absurd, but think about it—you 
spent time going to school so you could get a good job. You spent time 
working that job so you could save money for a house. You bought that 


house, so you had the time and space to have a family. 


Effectively, when the biological imperative in life is to reproduce, you are 
going to be seeking out a mate. After all, you cannot reproduce on your 
own—you need a partner to do so. This means that your entire life is going 


to be a build-up to your romantic relationships. 


Unfortunately, relationships have a tendency to fail. In failing, they also 
cause a great deal of sadness or frustration as a direct consequence. This 
makes sense—if your entire purpose in life is to reproduce, if you feel like 
you cannot have children because you cannot find a relationship, you are 
going to feel like you are failing, and that sense of failure can be 


debilitating. For this reason, learning to ensure that you have the skills to 


manage your relationships is critical. You need to know that you can 
manage your relationships as successfully as possible if you hope to ever 


actually keep and maintain a relationship. 


Healthy Relationships 


When you seek to build a healthy relationship, you may find that you have 
some serious soul-searching to do. Are you the one that is causing problems 
in the relationships? Is there something wrong with your own approach? In 
being willing and able to question the relationship from the perspective of 
others, you may find that you are actually doing several things that may 


make your relationship far more difficult to manage than you had intended. 


Nevertheless, let’s take a look at what a healthy relationship will typically 
look like. Understanding it can really help you gain insight into how best to 


approach your future relationships. 


i — 
+ Both partners are happy to spend time together 


+ Neither partner should feel like waking away isthe right 


i = 
+ No one person should dominate the relationship 

Gratefulness 
| + Both partners are grateful for the other and show it | 


r =a 
+ Both partners try to offer the benefit of the doubt when they 
can 


First and foremost—you should always feel like you can communicate with 
your partner. When you are able to communicate effectively with your 
partner, you and your partner can work through almost any problem 
together. Effectively, working together creates a situation in which you can 
actively engage together, understanding both sides of the problems until 


you can both come to some sort of consensus or solution. 


Beyond that, both parties should be willing to spend time together. You 
should trust that your partner wants to spend time with you, and even if that 
time is difficult to find in the first place, it is critical for you to find it if you 
hope to be effective in your relationships. You must also be willing to 
accommodate when challenges arise. Perhaps your partner has to go away 
for two weeks for work—will you be okay? Some weaker relationships may 
struggle with this, but if you are able to cope with it, you may find that 
distance makes the heart fonder. 


Your relationship should also be quite fair—both parties should put in a 
reasonable amount of work. Remember one critical aspect here—fair is not 
always equal. If one party works an inordinate amount of time, then it is 
only fair to assume that the other party is going to be doing more of the 
housework. For example, say that you work a standard 40-hour workweek, 
and your partner works regular 60 hour work weeks. Since you are home 
50% more than your partner, it makes sense that you would take a larger 
amount of the housework. This does not mean that your partner would be 


exempt, but you would not have to do nearly as much. 


All of the above leads to a relationship based upon gratefulness for each 
other, and both partners are willing to show it. Further, you and your partner 
are then both far more willing to provide that sense of camaraderie and love 
that you have been seeking. When you are able to maintain that camaraderie 


long-term, you will strengthen your relationship. 


Reciprocity and Relationships 


Reciprocity is critical in nearly every context in your personal and social 
life. Because reciprocity is one of those things in which you do it, or you do 
not, when you are always willing to include reciprocity with your 
relationships, you are able to better the relationship in general. Reciprocity 


refers to how likely you are to return the favor. 


Within intimate relationships, reciprocity is critical. It is the epitome of 
equality—both you and your partner feel like neither of you are willing to 
put up with the idea that one of you would be dominant in the relationship. 
This does not mean dominant in the sense that one member of the 
relationship tends to care more than the other about trivial matters such as 
where you are going out to eat or what you will do on date night—it refers 
to dominance in the sense of utter control. While some relationships can 
make this work, for the most part, a relationship in which one party is able 
to entirely dominate and control the entire thing is not usually considered 


particularly relationship friendly. 


Reciprocity in a relationship implies that you and your partner are willing to 
cooperate, as well as recognizing the idea that while you and your partner 
are individual people with your own likes and dislikes, you are also people 
that are highly interdependent. You rely upon each other and are committed 


to nurturing those feelings toward each other. 


With that in mind, you may begin to see why reciprocity is so important. 
This is not referring simply to reciprocity in the sense that you must be 
returning a gift at the next gift-giving season after one person has given a 


gift to the other—rather, this sort of reciprocity occurs when the two of you 


have dedicated yourselves to ensuring that the other is taken care of. It is 
the idea of being willing to offer to scratch your partner’s back before your 


partner asks you to, and then getting your own back scratched in return. 


Please note, however, that the expectation of reciprocity can sometimes lead 
to some serious disconnects. Remember that in your relationships, you 
should not be expecting anything. Expecting that leads to your own 


entitlement, which is the exact opposite of reciprocity. 


Commitments and Relationships 


Next, keep in mind that commitments are critical in relationships. If you are 
making a commitment within your relationship, you are offering to do a 
certain set of things for the other person, and this should not be taken 
lightly. When you take this sort of behavior lightly, you may find that you 
actually struggle to find people with whom you can create a meaningful 
relationship. After all, commitments can be scary and difficult to make, 
especially early on. However, people value commitment, and if you are 
afraid to commit, you are essentially afraid to ever have a functioning 
relationship as being willing and able to commit is perhaps one of the 
largest criteria for most people. If someone is not willing to commit to 
monogamy, most people are likely to struggle with the idea of the 
relationship in the first place. If you refuse to acknowledge that you will no 
longer pursue other people, the person you are actively dating is likely to 
dump you because you are effectively treating him as a backup in case 


someone else that catches the other person’s fancy comes in. 


When you are willing to commit to a relationship, however, you may notice 
that things are actually going to change for the better. If you are willing to 
make commitments, other people will be more willing to commit to you 
simply due to the idea that you should reciprocate when someone else does 


something for you. 


This means then that in your relationships, you are likely to find someone 
somewhere that can, in fact, make things work the way that you want. 
When you do find them, as soon as you can get a commitment from them, 


you are likely to get whatever was committed. 


Expectations and Relationships 


Finally, one thing that is important to look at is what will happen when 
things expectations are added to a relationship. Expectations are certain 
things that you assume are going to happen simply because you believe it. 
In many instances, it is accurate, but today, he is wrong. When you are in a 
relationship with someone else, you may find that over time, it becomes 


incredibly easy to develop an expectation for that person. 


When you are in a relationship with someone who does not tend to 
recognize reality for what it is, you may be working under a narcissist. In 
particular, when you look at a relationship that you have had in the past, can 
you identify any problematic behaviors that may have happened before. 
What was the root cause? Can you identify any of the times during that last 


relationship that you may have had some unrealistic expectations? 


In particular, unrealistic expectations are amongst some of the worst that 
you can expose your partner too. If you have an unrealistic expectation that 
your partner should be a certain body type at all times, and you got with 
someone with that body type that eventually changed, if you left that 
relationship because it no longer met your expectation, you might have 
been unrealistic. Being unrealistic is typically quite bad—while it is 
important to have an idea of what you want, having several unrealistic 
standards can leave you scrambling to find a relationship with little to no 
luck. You may desperately try, and yet, at every turn, you find that people 
run away like their pants are on fire. This is a huge red flag that something 


you are doing is inappropriate or problematic. 


With your relationships, perhaps the best thing that you can do is ensure 
that your expectations are reasonable. Ask yourself if you are willing to 
follow the expectations that you set out for yourself, for example. However, 
as you do this, remember that just because you are willing to do something 
does not mean that everyone is willing to do it, and you must keep that in 
mind. It is incredibly important for you to figure out what you absolutely 
want and need, while also juggling what is realistic and fair to expect out of 
the other party. You do not want to have these unrealistic expectations that 
are impossible to ever actually meet, as that is asking far too much out of 


the other party—that is not fair to them and should never be forced. 


Chapter 7: The Psychology of Success 


Success—everyone wants it. Whether you want a successful relationship, a 
successful career, or a successful life, you are striving for excellence, and 
that is okay. When you are striving for this sort of excellence, you are 
telling yourself that you deserve the best of what you have to offer yourself, 
and that is showing that you truly care about how you see yourself and what 


you do with yourself. 


This is good—you are showing what you are deserving of. You are showing 
that you know that you deserve the best and that you are willing to put your 
best foot forward. However, you may feel like it is difficult to get past that 
point. What is success? How do you become successful? How can you be 
sure that you ultimately get the life that you feel that you deserve? This 
chapter seeks to help you answer these questions—we will come up with a 
definition of success .then, we will discuss how success exists as a 
psychology within emotional intelligence—and finally, how to strengthen 
emotional intelligence in order to ensure that you are as successful as you 


have set out to become. 


When you are successful, one thing is for sure—you are opening up dozens 
of doors for yourself, and in doing so, you are bound to find one that is 
perfect for you. You will find one that serves you well and keeps you happy. 
It is simply a matter of finding happiness and figuring out how best to 


pursue it. 


Making Your Own Definition of Success 


Success is one of those things that is incredibly personal. Your own 
definition of success is likely to vary greatly from the definitions of those 
around you. This is okay—success is something that is entirely for you, so 
it is okay for it to be personal and varying based on the individual. You 
should make sure that the definition of success that you create is one that 


truly encompasses what you want to achieve. 


In particular, there are seven steps to defining your own success—if you can 
follow these steps, you are likely to find that you can find that success for 


yourself. 


First, you must ask yourself what success looks like to you. Figure out what 
it is that you want out of life and write it down for yourself. Do you want a 
life that is defined by being comfortable? Perhaps you want to ensure that 
you are happy. Maybe it is with a partner, exactly three children, a nice 
minivan parked in the driveway, and a nice, middle-class home that you 
own. This is a perfectly okay picture of success—if your dream is to have a 
family. It may be. Ultimately, however, your picture of success should 


directly reflect what you want in life. 


With that picture of success in mind, it is time to make a plan. This is when 
you figure out exactly how you will achieve that success that you so deeply 
desire. This step is critical for ensuring that you are actually able to achieve 
your success—a plan that is not actually planned out is not likely to pan out 
either, and that is problematic. Make sure that your plan is as specific as 
possible as you do make it, as well. With a specific plan in mind, you are far 


more likely to achieve it than you may actually believe. 


At this point, you need to make your goal happen. Do what you must and 
see what happens as a result. Is the other party happy with you? Do you like 
the results? Was it everything that you ever wanted? This is a critical point 
in this skill. 


Finally, you must determine whether you were actually successful or not. If 
you were great! If not, try again in the future. You may need to make some 
tweaks to what you are doing, but it will be worth it when you finish your 
work up with ease and find that your success has, in fact, been achieved 
once and for all. In making sure that you never give up, you promise 
yourself to remain resilient and steadfast in your attempt to achieve success 


for yourself. 


Psychology of Success and Emotional Intelligence 


Remember, if you want to be successful, you want to be emotionally 
intelligent. This means you want to learn to begin with all of those 
regulation skills that have been discussed thus far. You want to learn if you 
can, in fact, successfully pull off those stretch goals that you have been 
reaching for. If you do succeed, great! If not, remember that it is not the end 
of the world. 


Those who are emotionally intelligent tend to also be quite skilled when it 
comes to coping with stress and discomfort. Thanks to the fact that they are 
great at self-regulation, you can usually keep the stress and discomfort at 
bay. This means that you can actively protect yourself in ways that you did 


not think were possible at some points in time. 


Emotionally intelligent individuals are able to cope with the stress and 
overwhelming feelings that come along with failure as well—when they do 
face that fear and discomfort, they tend to figure out how best to cope with 
it. The emotionally intelligent individual may make it a point, for example, 
to try again. This sort of resilience is critical to those who are trying to be 
successful. If you can be successful through making it a point to deal with 
failure, you are effectively learning through trial and error without ever 


letting someone else hurt or impact yourself negatively. 


When you are faced with failure, you instead decide to learn from it. You 
figure out a new way to tackle the problem, and much of the time, when 
you do behave in such a way, you find that you are actually far more likely 
to get further in life. You figure out how best to take care of yourself, and 


that brings with it a happiness and feeling of success. Effectively, because 


you continued to try and were perseverant, you eventually found the 


solution on your own, and that is worthy of praise itself. 


This means, then, if you wish to be more successful in general, you want to 
figure out how best to go about becoming emotionally intelligent. You want 
to actively become emotionally intelligent to pursue that definition of 
success, no matter what that definition is. If you are able to bolster your 
own EQ skills, you may find that you are far more likely to finally achieve 


that success when you reach for it. 


Building Emotional Intelligence 


Trying to figure out how best to build your emotional intelligence if you do 
not know what you are doing or where you are going is incredibly difficult. 
However, thanks to this book, you are getting a short guide right here. In 
fact, this section will provide you with several tips to help build your 
emotional intelligence to levels at which you will be far more effective in 
general. 


Find Assertion 


Remember, assertive is not the same as aggressive. If you can figure out 
how to be seen as assertive, you can ensure that people do not see you as 
too aggressive and, therefore, too threatening or too timid and therefore a 
risk of being abused into giving them free things, for example. 


Learn active listening 


It is critical for those who wish to be successful in having strong, active 
listening skills. When you find that your skillset, you commonly spend far 
too much time looking at yourself and how you feel instead of learning 
what other people are truly trying to communicate. For example, imagine 
that you are in a fight with your partner. If you are able to communicate 
clearly through the methods associated with emotional intelligence, you are 
far more likely to find that you are actually able to figure out the problem at 
the end of the day. Effectively, active listening will encourage attention and 


learning skills. 


Developing your own motivation 


One of the crucial differences between people who are successful and those 
who are not is primarily a matter of whether or not someone is able to put 
up with some negative behaviors and if you are willing to put up with it, but 
rather what your own motivations are. When you know what your own 
motivations are, you can usually figure out exactly what you need to do in 
order to actively and accurately what you want in life. Understanding your 


motivation and coming up with a goal for yourself can help immensely. 


Become an optimist 


Another critical skill in emotional intelligence is optimism. If you want to 
be optimistic, you are far more likely to succeed simply because you will 
have positive mindsets. Remember, mindsets are contagious, and if you 
think in a positive mindset, you are likely to attract more positivity to 
yourself as well. For this reason, you want to make it a point to always look 
on the bright side of things to ensure that you are actually as happy as you 


need to be in order to truly be successful in the first place. 


Be self-aware 


If you want to be successful, you must also be self-aware. In being self- 
aware, you are effectively able to self-regulate when you are not happy or 
optimistic. Effectively, you are able to begin progressing in your work 
because you no longer have to worry about actively trying to project 
something in particular. Your ability to become self-aware is all that you 


need. 


Learn to Empathize 


Success comes primarily from within you, but most of the time, other 
people are still relevant to it. You need to make sure that you interact with 
other people as well to be as successful as possible. This means then that 
you have no choice but to actively try to empathize with other people. 
Empathy brings with it better understanding, and better understanding 
brings with it better relationships, and those relationships push you in the 


right direction toward the success that you naturally want and crave. 


Develop Open Body Language 


Perhaps a critical skill, if you wish to be successful at anything involving 
other people, you are going to want to make sure that you actively develop 
body language that is inviting rather than shut off from the world. This 
means making it a priority to emphasize smiles, keeping your body 
language relaxed, and more. When you do this, you find that people are far 
friendlier than you realized. Effectively, people all want to see you and 
interact with you when you are actively friendly and helping other people 


out. 


Developing Emotional Intelligence for Leadership 


When you do actively decide that emotional intelligence is right for you or 
that you absolutely want to be in some sort of leadership position, perhaps 
the best thing that you can do is push those emotional intelligence skills in 
order to actually ensure that you are on the right track for leadership and 


success. 
The Positivity Challenge 


Considering that perhaps one of the largest threats to your success is your 
own attitude, especially if that attitude is one of indifference or negativity, 
changing your own mindset to become positive is one of the best ways to 
increase your chances of success. Consider for a moment how many 
negative thoughts go through your mind in the course of a day. You may 
find that you are happy one minute, but as soon as you drop a mug that 
shatters, you find yourself furious and telling yourself that you are stupid. 


This is problematic—you should never be that negative to yourself. 


EEAS TE 
arr 


When you do find yourself in a negative moment, one of the best things that 
you can do is ensure that you are able to actively challenging negative 
thoughts with positive ones. You will be tasked with providing three 


positive tasks to anything you word one toward negatively. 


For example, imagine that you tell yourself that you are stupid. Now, you 
must come up with three distinct positives, and they should all be about 
yourself. When you do this, you are effectively shifting your own thinking, 
allowing yourself to think in positive manners instead of the negative ones. 

Effectively, you are actively teaching yourself to figure out how best to 
avoid all of the negativity by drowning it in a sea of positivity. Very quickly, 
after several reiterations of actively having to figure out how to positively 
address a situation that you have had a negative thought about, you are 
likely to begin sort of curtailing the habit, especially if it is tied to some sort 


of reward for yourself. 
Gratefulness Challenge 


Similar to the idea of having that positive thought challenge, you must also 
come up with a challenge about things that you are grateful for. You think, 
for example, that you are not grateful enough with what you got for 
Christmas because you feel like the items that were bought for you were 


items that probably would have been better served toward the other person. 


When you are attempting the gratefulness challenge, you effectively want to 
ensure that you are able to practice gratefulness on a regular basis. You 
want to make sure that you can actually recognize what you are happy to 
have that is not entitled to you, and you are happy to thank those who have 


worked so hard to give you what you have. 


Perhaps one of the best ways to do a gratefulness challenge, however, is 
done on paper and pencil to write down what you are happy and grateful 
for. You may write down what you are grateful that you have food, for 
example, or that you are thankful for the clothing or dog food that was 
donated to a dog that had nothing to give. When you acknowledge out loud 
or on paper what you are grateful for, it can help you greatly in figuring out 


what to do next and where to go from there. 
The Eye Contact Challenge 


This does not mean that you should be actively attempting to have staring 
contests with everyone around you—instead, you should be actively 
attempting to maintain eye contact at a healthy level. You will want to be 
able to actively make that eye contact with other people if you ever hope to 


have a good chance of success. 


Because so much of success depends upon other people, you need to be 
able to look at people in the eyes. If you are able to make eye contact, you 
are far more likely to be able to get that success simply because you will be 
better at interacting with other people. If you can do so, you will find that 
you are perceived to be better socially than if you were unable to make eye 


contact at all. 


To do this challenge, you must make it a point to work up to eye contact for 
extended periods of time with other people. In particular, the magic number 
is 50% when speaking, 70% of the time when listening. This is imperative 
—it is the perfect amount to let the other person know that you care about 
what they think while also actively avoiding staring down the other person 
to the point that he or she feels uncomfortable. Instead, you keep eye 


contact somewhat causal while still quite attentive with them. 


Chapter 8: Using Psychology to 
Fight Procrastination 


And finally—you have arrived at the end of the book! Here, you will be 
tasked with figuring out exactly what you need to do, how to do it, and why 
it matters. Effectively, in this method, you will be figuring out exactly how 
you should approach situations of procrastination, which can be some of the 
most difficult to ever actually get out of simply due to the nature of the 


problem. 


Everyone procrastinates now and then, however sometimes, it gets to a 
point in which it is overwhelming—it is so problematic that you are 
actively procrastinating that you fail to get things done by their deadlines 
much of the time. Slowly, bit by bit, you find that your procrastination is 
taking over your life and ruining it. You want to do your work, and you 


know that you have work to do, and yet instead, you find that you are stuck. 


Within this last chapter, we will be addressing procrastination in general. 
We will look at what it is and what the problem with procrastination is. You 
will see some of the most common reasons people around you tend to 
procrastinate, and finally, you will be exposed to several of the methods 
through which you can defeat procrastination once and for all. In doing so, 
you may be surprised to find many of your issues relating to time 


management will disappear altogether. 


In making these issues disappear, you may find that your stress level also 
declines dramatically, and with that decreased stress level, you may be 


better suited toward continuing to get your work done. This is good—with 


less procrastination comes more productivity, and that productivity is what 


you are looking for if you wish to be successful. 


The Problem with Procrastination 


Procrastination is incredibly difficult to cope with—it becomes habitual 
after a while, and it is only in demolishing that procrastination problem that 
you are ever actually able to defeat it. In defeating it, you will begin to 
improve your success, but until you get to that point, you are going to have 
to practice extreme self-control if you wish to bring that procrastination 


problem to a grinding halt. 


First, let’s look at what procrastination is. At its core, procrastination is the 
absence of doing what you should be at any given moment. You are actively 
choosing to do something contrary to what you should be, even though you 
know that you are making a bad choice. This means that it is nowhere near 
the same as laziness, which involves apathy. In this case, it is a willingness 


to do something entirely unrelated to what needs to get done. 


Typically, people procrastinate because whatever it is that they have been 
tasked to do is boring, uncomfortable, or generally unpleasant in nature, and 
they decide that they are better off simply avoiding doing it altogether. 
However, all this does is cause more problems in the end. It leads to you 
instead trying to haphazardly rush through everything at the last minute 
instead of taking your time to get everything done with meticulous attention 


to detail as is usually expected of you. 


Nevertheless, people everywhere continue to procrastinate. Even knowing 
that procrastination is something harmful, it is done anyway willingly. Of 
course, then, in response, work builds up instead of gets done. It becomes a 
matter of having a backlog of poorly done work instead of having your 
work done meticulously in advance, and that is problematic. 


Why People Procrastinate 


People tend to procrastinate for all sorts of reasons. Some do so because 
they are bored and do not want to do what they are supposed to be doing. 
Others do it because they would rather find something fun or enjoyable to 
do. Others still do it out of compulsive habit. They become so habituated to 
procrastination that it becomes this vicious cycle that is incredibly difficult 


to escape. 


Consider for a moment that you have been procrastinating on that big paper 
for your politics class all week. You knew that it was coming up—it had 
been in your calendar for months, and yet, you still had not touched it. 
Knowing that it was due tomorrow, you looked it up this evening, only to 
find that you have no idea what you are doing. You choose to instead spend 


some time watching television instead of working on it. 


A little bit later, you remind yourself that you have no choice but to get that 
work done if you want to actually get through it. You go to sit down at the 
paper, but you cannot help but feel stressed as you sit there. Soon, you are 
on social media instead of working, and soon after that, you find yourself 


constantly reading messages online. 


Though you may not be aware of it, this is all because you have developed 
a tendency to be afraid of tests in general. You know that you usually 
struggle with tests, and because of that, you find that you stress out about 
them for a few weeks before they arrive. Of course, because you spend all 
of that time incredibly nervous and not studying effectively, you are 
nowhere near prepared on the morning of. You submit your paper and hope 
for the best. 


In the end, you really struggled. However, that failure could actually have 
been a good thing. Had you been any quicker or they been any slower, you 
would have been able to figure out exactly how to tackle the problem 
sooner. However, instead, you failed and then took that failure to heart. That 
failure taken to heart becomes the reason that you struggle to get work 


done. 


Effectively, getting the work done becomes stressful. When you are at 
work, you do not have any real leeway in your schedule. However, at home, 
that leeway is there—and you use it all and then some. This problem leads 


you to constantly be running late on everything. 


However, if you were to stop and consider what was actually happening in 
the moment, you would realize that it was actually a cycle of anxiety. You 
are afraid of failure, so you struggle to begin. In struggling to begin, you 
run late. In running late, you fail. You then effectively solidified that 


particular negative thought—you did fail. Therefore, you must be a failure. 


Remaining stuck in that mindset is incredibly unproductive, however, and it 
is in your best interest to ensure that you are able to actively figure out how 


best to combat that as soon as you can. 


The problem, however, is that the mind is effectively hardwired to follow 
the negative habit of procrastination. It is designed to avoid any sort of 
negativity. When you are procrastinating, you are avoiding some sort of 
negative stimulus, and at the end of the day, you are designed to do exactly 
that. Effectively, you get hit with anxiety, and that anxiety sends you into 
fight or flight mode. You then instinctively go into flight mode, allowing for 
further procrastination despite the fact that it is so incredibly harmful to the 
individual. You struggle to actually keep up, and your stress levels then 


skyrocket in response and you are left disappointing those counting on you. 


Defeating Procrastination with Psychology 


Defeating procrastination is all about learning how to kick back those 
feelings of negativity in order to bring back productivity. If you can get 
yourself working in productivity instead of negativity, you will find that 
you can begin to meet those deadlines once more. You can actively get 
yourself working toward exactly what you needed to since you will be 


motivated, rather than being avoidant. 


While defeating your procrastination problem may seem incredibly 
intimidating, it is quite doable. At the end of the day, all you need to do is 
figure out how best to tap into your mind to visualize exactly what you 
want. You need to force your mind to see that procrastinating is the enemy 
—despite the fact that it seems to be exactly what you want in the moment, 
it is actually hurting you far more than it is helping, and that can be 
incredibly intimidating. When you feel like you cannot benefit from 
procrastination any longer, you may be more willing to avoid it in the 
future, essentially hijacking your mind to push toward motivation as the 


default state once more. 


As your mind accepts that motivated and achieving is the right state to be 
in, you will find that you are actually far more likely than ever to succeed. 
Your motivation is attractive to other people, and new opportunities will 
arise for you in the end. You will start to see long-term benefits that arise if 
you can just convince your mind that what you need to do more than 


anything else is to figure out how best to be motivated once more. 


Visualize Your Future 


Perhaps one of the most versatile tools that you have in your arsenal is your 
ability to visualize. You can visualize nearly anything—you can fantasize 
about something that you have always wanted, or you can fantasize about 
success. Ultimately, what you will be doing here is fantasizing over 
whatever it is that is incredibly important to you. If for you, what is 
important is success, you would envision that success exactly as you think it 
looks. Effectively, you want to show yourself exactly what it is that you 
want and exactly how you hope to get it. If you do this, you are likely to 
ensure that your mind gets a taste for what may be in store if you are able to 


actively push for it. 


For example, imagine that you know that you have a vacation coming up. 
You know that you do not want to take your work on vacation, but you will 
have to do so if you do not take care of everything that needs to be done. 
Imagine for a moment how you would feel working away in your room 
while also watching out the window as people enjoy the beach outside 
without you. If you do not get that work done, that will be your future. You 
want to stress to yourself that in failing to meet that deadline for yourself, 
you are going to have no choice but to continue down that road. Remind 
yourself that you have plenty of time to actually meet your goals if you 
spend the time to get through all the work without actually procrastinating, 
and then encourage yourself to do exactly that. You want to make sure that 


you are able to actually get that work done so you can be free. 


Now, imagine that same vacation if you were to spend the time to get your 
work done ahead of time. Think of the beach—the sand underneath your 


feet and the sound of the ocean lapping at the shore. Remind yourself that 


you would absolutely love to spend your time there instead of at home or in 
the hotel working. Remind yourself that the point of your vacation is to 
leave your work behind and to take a quick break. Tell yourself that if you 
want that break, you will need to work while committing that thought to 
memory. Burn the image of your vacation destination into your mind and 
summon it into your mind’s eye every time you feel yourself beginning to 
procrastinate at all. In doing so, you will make sure that you deter yourself 


from procrastination every time you start to feel tempted to do so. 


If done correctly, your mind will be willing to go through finishing the 
work as planned simply because it now feels like working on vacation is far 
worse than working at work when you’d rather watch another cat video. 
Because your mind is reminding itself that if you were to not work when it 
was work time, you would work more during the vacation, you will find 


that you are more likely to actively work and stay on schedule. 


Accountability 


People frequently find themselves workout buddies for the sole purpose of 
accountability. All things considered, working out with someone else can be 
quite distracting, but at the very least, it offers a level of accountability that 
you otherwise will not have. At that point, if you are to procrastinate, you 
will not only be letting yourself down—you will be letting down the other 
person as well. You will be making them go to the gym on their own instead 
of going with a friend that is going at the same time. 


The idea of holding yourself accountable is incredibly powerful—humans 
tend to feel like they must be held accountable simply because telling other 
people that you have failed is generally not particularly enjoyable. If you 
have told other people that you were going to be doing something, you will 
feel the urge to ensure that you follow through simply due to the 
accountability. 


Because people want to be seen as consistent, they tend to follow through 
when they voice that they are going to do something, and this is exactly 


why you end up doing exactly as promised when you are telling others what 
you are up to. Effectively, you are making sure that other people will follow 
up and ask you about your work, or you are making sure that someone else 
will be actively looking for you wherever you are supposed to be. If you are 
supposed to be at the gym working out, you will have someone looking for 


you and expecting you to spot them. 


It is generally much harder for people to be willing to let down others than 
to let down themselves, and this is why it is so important to set up that 
accountability—people will follow along simply because they want to avoid 
letting down others who may be following or paying attention to what they 
are doing. 


Bribes 


Finally, one last way that you can keep yourself motivated is through the 
use of bribes. In psychology, this method is known as positive 
reinforcement—you actively reward good, positive behavior. Because of 
this, you can use bribes to effectively get people to stay on track with their 
work. You will do this if you want to ensure that everyone is doing what 


they said that they would do and what they need to do. 


Imagine that you have a 30-page file to get through at work. You may feel 
like that is far too much and continue to push it off simply because you do 
not want to work on it. As you do this, you find that it is getting pushed off 
simply because you do not want to do it in the first place. With that in mind, 
you instead make it a point to actively bribe yourself to get through the 


work. 


You decide that, after every 5 files you get through, you are free to spend 30 
minutes playing a video game that you have been dying to play. Once all of 
the files are done, you tell yourself, you will buy yourself that new game 
that you have been dying to get your hands on as well. Effectively, you 
layer on so much positivity to what you need to get done that suddenly, 
getting through everything is a breeze. You may find that those files are 
finished up far quicker than they otherwise would have been, freeing you up 
and allowing you to move on with your life without worrying about 


procrastination continuing to eat away at your time and energy. 


Eventually, you find that all files are done, and you feel quite accomplished 


and proud. This alone is a positive reinforcement, but when you add in the 


idea of actually getting a new game as well, you have doubly reinforced 
that new action. You are beginning to see procrastinating as less of an 
attempt to avoid work and more of an attempt to be lazy, and little by little, 
you find that you get better about actively finishing up all of your work 
without complaint. Eventually, you are even able to develop that internal 
motivation that comes from yourself. So long as you learn how to tap into 


that motivation, you will find that everything else comes naturally. 


As with the vast majority of difficult tasks and difficult habits to break, the 
hardest part is the beginning. As soon as you get started and get past that 
first hurdle, it does get easier. It becomes easier and easier to find that 
intrinsic motivation within yourself to help you, and you are far more likely 
to succeed. All you need to do is get past that first push once and for all. 


Remember, you can do it. You just need to set your mind to it. 


Conclusion 


Congratulations! You have arrived at the end of Introducing Psychology! At 
this point, you should have a pretty solid idea on the foundation of 
psychology, what it entails, and how you should approach it. It is of the 
utmost hope that you have found this book to be at least as informative as it 
was intended to be. The book was designed to teach about psychology as 
much as possible within a short period of time, and while it is not a 
complete textbook the way something for psychology 101 in college may 
be, it is still jam-packed with some of the basic principles of psychology, 


such as what emotions are, what causes them, why they exist, and more. 


As you read this book, it is with hope that you begin to put some of the 
work discussed into practice. Make it a point to remind yourself how happy 
you are with your partner to help build your relationship. Spend time 
talking to coworkers about your goals, so you work harder toward them 
simply because you expect the subject to be brought up over and over again 
when your coworkers get curious. Remind yourself that emotions are so 


incredibly important to understand and why they matter. 


From here, you have several choices in where to go. You could make it a 
point to look into some of the most popular self-help fields of psychology. 
These are most commonly cognitive behavioral therapy, dark psychology, 
subliminal psychology, and emotional intelligence. Any one of these 
subjects would provide plenty of information about the mind, as well as 


provide you with more on it all. 


Remember, this book is meant to cover plenty of different topics—if you 
wish, you can go more in-depth for literally any of them. You can choose to 
learn more about empathy or how to interact with other people. No matter 
what you choose, however, you know that you are making a good choice 
simply because you are actively learning. Active learning is critical if you 


wish to be successful. 


As this book draws to a close once and for all, remember that you are 
capable. Whether to regulate your emotions, tackle your anger, or even to 
help you become successful in relationships and with other people in 
general, this book had help to offer you. This book wanted to provide you 
with all of the basic information necessary to think about the topics 


included. 


Finally, if you have enjoyed this book at all, please consider leaving a 
review with your honest opinion. It is always greatly appreciated to have 
the opinion of a reader written out, and it would be an honor to have yours 
as well. Thank you so much for joining me on this journey through the 
mind from beginning to end. Hopefully, you found it insightful, enjoyable, 
and overall, quite pleasant. Good luck on your journey. If you set your mind 
to it, you will be able to do just about anything. Remember, you hold the 
power of your mind—all you need to do is learn how to tap into it once and 
for all. If you do so, you will be able to actively engage with your mind in 


the most productive manner possible. 


How To Analyze People with Dark 
Psychology 


By Learning To Read People Through 
Behavior and Body Language, You Will 
Understand the Mind and Personality of 

Those Who Are Close To You in Everyday 
Life 


Introduction 


Congratulations on purchasing How to Analyze People with Dark 


Psychology, and thank you for doing so. 


People are inherently tricky to understand. With free will, the ability to 
think and override emotional impulses, and innumerous personality types 
and temperaments, it can be difficult to understand exactly what pushes 
someone to do what he or she does or to predict what will happen next. 
When you are interacting with someone, you may oftentimes wonder what 
it is that is going on inside the other person’s mind—this is a normal thing 
to wonder, especially if it is someone close to you, or if you are doubting 
the veracity of the person that you are interacting with. When this happens, 


your best possible course of action is to learn how to read the other person. 


When you learn how to analyze someone, you learn how to figure out what 
makes them tick. You figure out motivations and goals. You learn about 
what makes someone who they are and how to push them to behave in 
certain ways. You can do this to better understand who someone is, or you 
can also attempt to make someone do something. You can use it to detect 
lying or to better your own relationships. You can use it to become more 
skilled at your job, enabling you to develop better people skills. The 
possibilities for your usage of analyzing other people are endless. 

In particular, one way to analyze people is through the understanding and 
usage of dark psychology. This may sound insidious and threatening, but it 
does not have to be. Dark psychology is not necessarily designed to be evil 
and underhanded, but it is directly derived from looking at how some of the 


darkest minds in the world function. In particular, you will be looking at 


how people tend to behave as if you were looking through the eyes of a 
human predator—of someone whose sole goal is to figure out what 
motivates other people and figure out how to exact absolute control and 


command perfect submission from the other party. 


As you read through this book, you will be guided through learning how to 
analyze people for yourself. You will delve into understanding the various 
personality types that people can have, learning more about how other 
people view the world. You will develop an understanding of verbal vs. 
nonverbal communication and how both are used constantly when you are 
interacting with other people. You will be guided through how to read the 
most common telltale nonverbal communication signs, as well as how to 
falsify your own language. You will learn how to detect when people are 
deceptive with you, learning why, how, and what to look for. You will be 
introduced to dark psychology and how to understand the world through the 
eyes of human predators, learning how to use it to analyze others. Lastly, 
you will begin to see how dark psychology affects people, both in looking 
at malicious attempts to manipulate others as well as looking at when it is 


used benevolently and in a way that is intended to help other people. 


Throughout the reading, you will be provided all of the information that you 
need to begin understanding people around you. If you are willing to 
commit the information that you will be provided to memory, you will find 


that understanding even strangers becomes easier for you. 


There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for 
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much 


useful information as possible; please enjoy it! 


Chapter 1: Analyzing People 


Take a moment to imagine a time when the sight of someone sent a chill 
down your spine. You may not have known why, but you were simply 
uncomfortable around the person that you were facing. Despite your best 
attempts to identify the reasoning behind your problem, you found that 
there was no particular reason that you could discern. All you knew was 
that you were afraid of the person in front of you and that you had no idea 


what was driving those feelings or how to overcome them. 


There was a very good reason for this guttural reaction—your instincts were 
telling you that something about the other person was not right. You didn’t 
need to know specifics, and all that mattered to you was that your own 
reactions were accurate. This is because all these guttural reactions must do 


is keep you alive. So long as that is managed, your instincts did their job. 


When you first look at someone, your unconscious mind goes through all 
sorts of information to come up with what it assumes is a valid reading of 
the person. Of course, this all happens beneath your conscious awareness. 
This means that you are entirely unaware of it as it happens, and yet, you 
are able to respond to it without effort. Of course, being able to react 
without having to think about it much is always quite useful in survival 
settings—when you are not sitting to rationalize out what to do and why 
when in a survival setting and simply going on impulse, you do not waste 


valuable time that could be the difference between life and death. 


However, if you are not in a life-and-death situation, do you really want to 
be acting on impulse? Will your impulses really help you discern whether 
the person at the interview is lying or simply uncomfortable about 
something? Or to determine how your partner is feeling during an 
argument? There are limitless reasons that being able to rationally 
understand what is going on in someone else’s mind is critical, even if you 
already have a decent gut reaction. Ultimately, when you are able to analyze 
someone calmly and consciously be aware of why you are uncomfortable or 
what is putting you on-edge, you are better prepared to cope with the 
problem at hand. This is because you are able to act rationally. You can 
strategize on how to better react in the most conducive manner that will 


allow you to succeed in the situation. 


This means that in the modern world, when things are very rarely life or 
death situations, making an effort to switch to responding rationally and 
consciously is almost always the best bet. You will be able to tell when 
someone is setting off your alarm bells because they seem threatening, or 
because they seem deceptive. You will be able to figure out what the 


problem is in order to respond appropriately. 


Why Analyze People? 


Analyzing people is something that is utilized by several people in different 
capacities. The most basic reason you may decide that you wish to analyze 
someone is to simply understand them. While you already have your own 
built-in method of understanding other people, through being able to 
empathize with them, you will discover that having a cognitive rather than 
an emotional connection is critical if you want to truly get into someone 


else’s mind. 


Consider for a moment that you are trying to land a deal with a very 
important client. You know that the deal is critical if you hope to keep your 
job and possibly even get a promotion, but you also know that it is going to 
be a difficult task to manage. If you have the ability to read someone else, 
you can effectively allow yourself the ability to truly know what is going on 
in their mind. Think about it—you will be able to tell if the client is 
uncomfortable and respond accordingly. You will be able to tell if the client 
is being deceptive or withholding something—and respond accordingly. 
You can tell if the client is uninterested, feeling threatened, or even just 
annoyed with your attempts to sway him or her, and you can then figure out 


how to reply. 


When you are able to understand the mindset of someone else, you can self- 
regulate. You can fine-tune your own behaviors in order to guarantee that 
you will be persuasive. You can make sure that your client feels 
comfortable by being able to adjust your own behavior in order to figure out 


what was causing the discomfort in the first place. 


Beyond just being able to self-regulate, being able to read other people is 
critical in several other situations as well. If you can read someone else, you 
can protect yourself from any threats that may arise. If you can read 
someone else, you can simply understand their position better. You can 
figure out how to persuade or manipulate the other person. You can get 


people to do things that they would otherwise avoid. 


Ultimately, being able to analyze other people has so many critical benefits 
that it is absolutely worthwhile to be able to do so. Developing this skillset 
means that you will be more in touch with the feelings of those around you, 
allowing you to assert that you have a higher emotional intelligence simply 
because you come to understand what emotions look like. You will be able 
to identify your own emotions through self-reflection and learning to pay 
attention to your own body movements. The ability to analyze people can 


be invaluable in almost any setting. 


How to Analyze People 


Though it may sound intimidating, learning to analyze other people is not 
nearly as difficult as it may initially seem. There are no complicated rules 
that you need to memorize or any skills that you really need to learn—all 
you have to do is learn the pattern of behaviors and what they mean. This is 
because once you know the behaviors, you can usually start to piece 
together the intent behind the behaviors. You can begin to figure out exactly 
what it is that someone’s eyes narrowing means and then begin to identify it 
with the context of several other actions or behaviors as well. You can 
figure out what is intended when someone’s speech and their body language 
do not match up. Body language rarely lies when people are unaware of 
how it works, so you can oftentimes turn to it for crucial information if you 


are interacting with other people. 


The reason this works to understand people is because it is commonly 
accepted that there is a cycle between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. 
Your thoughts create feelings, and the feelings you have automatically 
influence your behaviors, as you can see through body language. Most of 
the time, this is an entirely unconscious cycle. You are unaware of it 
happening. However, several schools of therapy have chosen to identify and 
utilize this cycle, such as cognitive behavioral psychology. When you are 
able to recognize that this cycle exists, you can take advantage of it—you 
can begin to utilize your understanding of the cycle in order to follow it in 


reverse. 


Effectively, you will be looking at behaviors that people display and then 
tracing them back to the feelings behind them. This is why body language is 


so important to understand. When you can understand what is going on with 


someone’s behavior, you can understand their feelings. When you 
understand their feelings, you can begin to figure out the underlying 
thoughts that they have. This is about the closest thing to mind reading that 


you can ever truly attain. 


In order to analyze other people, you have a simple process to get through 
—you must first figure out the neutral baseline of behavior. This is the 
default behavior of the person. You must then begin to look for deviations 
in that neutral behavior. From there, you try to put together clusters of 
behaviors to figure out what is going on in the mid of someone else, and 
then you analyze. This process is not difficult, and if you can learn how to 
do so, while also learning how to interpret the various different types of 
body language, you will find that understanding other people could never 


be easier. 


Establishthe Identify Identify 
baseline deviations clusters of 
behavior from baseline deviations 


Establish a neutral baseline behavior set 


The most important aspect of being able to analyze someone else is through 
learning how to identify their baseline behavior. If you can do this, you can 
effectively allow yourself to identify how that person behaves in a neutral 
setting. Effectively, you will learn what that person’s quirks may be. For 
example, someone who happens to be reserved or particularly timid is 
likely to show several common signs of discomfort, even by default. They 
may cross their arms to shield their body, or stand defensively and refuse to 
make eye contact. As you will learn later through reading, this is a common 


body language that is regularly exhibited by those who are lying and do not 


know how to cover their tracks. However, the timid person is probably not 
lying if their behavior by default involves crossing arms and refusing to 


make eye contact. 


Because people’s baseline personality types and quirks vary so drastically 
from person to person, this becomes a critical first step, and you must make 
it a point to never skip it. Otherwise, you would assume that any shy person 
must be trying to deceive you. Getting that picture of baseline personality 


and nonverbal communication quirks is crucial. 


Identify deviations from neutral behaviors 


Once your baseline has been established, you can begin to identify any 
deviations from it. This means that you can figure out which of the 
behaviors that you are seeing do not match up with what you have come to 
expect via your initial observations. This stage can occur during all sorts of 
interactions. You may ask a question and then observe to see what the 
response will be in order to determine whether that person is answering 
truthfully. You can probe and look for signs of discomfort. You can 
effectively test to see how convincing you are being when you are trying to 


persuade someone to do something. 


Identify clusters of deviations 


Of course, just identifying those individual deviations is not always enough. 


You must also make it a point to recognize clusters of the deviations in 


order to get the true picture. When you get to Chapter 4: Reading Body 


Language, you will see that much of human body language can be 
interpreted in different ways depending on context, and oftentimes, you 
need to get that context from looking at other behaviors that are occurring 
in conjunction with the behaviors you are analyzing. For example, there are 
several behaviors in deception that could have several meanings, but as 
soon as they occur together, you can usually infer that there is some level of 


deception occurring, which means that you need to proceed with caution. 


Analyze 


Finally, as you identify those clusters of deviations from the original, 
neutral behavioral baseline, you can start to figure out what they mean. You 
can start to trace it backwards to figure out whether or not the person is 
honest or how they are feeling. When you begin to analyze, that is when 
you truly get the real snapshot of the thoughts inside the person’s mind. You 
will be able to piece together whether the person has a problem in certain 
settings based upon seeing general repeated responses. You will be able to 
tell what is intimidating to them, or what seems to consistently motivate 
them to keep working toward their goals. In going through this stage, you 
can start to figure out exactly what is needed to influence or manipulate 


them, if you should choose to do so. 


When to Analyze People 


Analyzing people is one of those skills that can be used in almost any 
context. You can use it at work, in personal relationships, in politics, 
religion, and even just in day-to-day life. Because of this versatility, you 
may find that you are constantly analyzing people, and that is okay. 
Remember, your unconscious mind already makes snapshot judgments 
about other people and their intentions, so you were already analyzing 
people, to begin with. Now, you are simply making an effort to ensure that 
those analyses are made in your conscious mind so you can be aware of 


them. 


Now, let’s take a look at several different compelling situations in which 


being able to consciously analyze someone is a critical skill to know: 


e In parenting: When you can analyze other people, you can begin 
to use those skills toward your children. Now, you may be 
thinking that a child’s mind is not sophisticated enough to get a 
reliable read on, but remember, the child’s feelings are usually 
entirely genuine—they have their feelings that they have, and 
though the reason behind those feelings may be less than 
compelling to you as a parent, that does not in any way dismiss 
the feelings. By being able to recognize the child’s emotions, you 
can begin to understand what is going on in your child’s mind, 
and that will allow you to parent calmly and more effectively. 

e In relationships: When you live with someone else, it can be 
incredibly easy to step on someone else’s toes without realizing it. 
Of course, constantly stepping on the toes of someone else is 


likely to lead to some degree of resentment if it is never 


addressed, and yet some people have a hard time discussing when 
they are uncomfortable or miserable. This is where being able to 
analyze someone else comes in—you will be able to tell what 
your partner’s base emotions are when you interact, allowing you 
to play the role of support. 

In the workplace: Especially if you interact with other people, 
you need to be able to analyze other people. You will be able to 
see how your coworkers view you, allowing you to change your 
own behaviors in order to get the company image that you desire. 
Beyond just that, you may also work in a field that requires you to 
be able to get good reads on someone in the first place. Perhaps 
you are a doctor—you may need to be able to tell how someone is 
feeling and whether they are honest with you to begin with. 
Maybe you are a lawyer and you need to be able to analyze the 
veracity of your client and of those that you are cross-examining. 
Maybe you are a salesperson who needs to be able to tell if you 
are being compelling in your attempt to close. 

In public: When you are interacting with people in public, you 
need to be able to protect yourself. When you can read other 
people, you can figure out whether you are safe or whether 
someone is threatening or suspicious. This means that you can 
prepare yourself no matter what the situation is to ensure that you 
are always ready to respond. 

In interviews: When you are applying and interviewing for a job, 
you may find that being able to read the interviewer’s body 
language can encourage you when you are doing well or cue you 


in to when it is time to change tactics or move on to something 


else. You will be able to tell how you are being taken simply by 
watching for body language and other nonverbal cues. 

When watching presentations: When you are watching a 
presentation, speech, or address, you may fall into the habit of 
simply taking everything at face value. After all, why would 
anyone ever make it a point to tell you something that is not true? 
This is because you are falling for one of the principles of 
persuasion—an appeal to authority. This means that you deem the 
person speaking an authority and therefore deem them to be 
trustworthy. Instead, make an effort to see the other party as what 
they truly are by learning to read their body language. You can 
tell if the politician on television is uncomfortable or lying simply 
by learning to analyze their behaviors. 

In arguments: When you are arguing with someone else, usually, 
emotions are running high on both ends. No one is thinking 
clearly, and things that were not meant can be said. However, 
when you can analyze people, you can start to figure out when 
someone else is getting emotional in order to disengage 
altogether. You will be able to identify the signs that you should 
disengage and try again later in order to ensure that you are not 
stepping on toes or making things worse. 

In self-reflection: When you can analyze other people, you can 
start to analyze yourself as well. This means that you can stop and 
look at your own body language to sort of check in with yourself 
and figure out what is going on in your own mind. Sometimes, it 
can be difficult to identify exactly how you are feeling, but this is 
the perfect way to do so in a pinch. If you can stop and self- 


reflect, you can identify your emotions. 


In self-regulation: Identifying your emotions then lends itself to 
the ability to self-regulate. When you are, for example, in a 
heated argument and feel yourself tensing up and getting 
annoyed, you may be able to key in to the fact that you are getting 
annoyed and respond accordingly. Conversely, when you can 
analyze other people, you can look at them and see how they are 
feeling. This means that if you can see that you are intimidating 
or making someone uncomfortable, you can make the necessary 


changes to your own actions. 


Chapter 2: Personality Types 


Now, before making it a point to analyze others, you must first begin to 
recognize personality types. Personalities change so much from person to 
person that learning how to identify the personality of someone else can be 
incredibly beneficial to you. When you can more or less piece together how 
someone thinks or what their default states of being may be, you will start 
to have a better general idea of how to predict your own behaviors will be 
interpreted. If you know, for example, that you are dealing with an 
introvert, you may make it a point to give the other person some breathing 
room rather than making it a point to insist on confrontation and problem- 


solving right that moment. 


From a slightly darker perspective, those who utilize dark psychology often 
use this step and understanding the personality type or tendencies of those 
around them to help them identify their next targets. This is because some 
personality types are far more tolerant than others, and those more tolerant 


people are going to be more likely to put up with problematic behaviors. 


Ultimately, when you stop to read someone else’s personality type, you will 
not get quite as clear of an image as you would get if they, for example, 
stopped everything that they were doing and suddenly made it a point to 
take a personality test, but you will still get valuable information that could 
serve you well. 

Within this chapter, we will be discussing one of the more popular methods 
to divide personality type—the Myers-Briggs Personality Types. You will 
be guided through each of the four categories that people get parsed into, 


giving you a total of 16 different personality types based on how people see 


the world. You will be guided through introversion vs. extroversion, 
whether people go with what they can observe or sense or their intuition, 
whether people think or feel, and whether they go based on judgment or 
sensing the world around them. This may not make sense yet, but you will 
be guided through each of those categories. Lastly, you will understand how 
to more or less guess what someone else’s personality type is based on a 
brief guide to the 16 Myers Briggs Personality Types. 


Please note that there are several different ways that people can stop and 
take apart personality types—you may see people refer to the Enneagram, 
another way to figure out personality type. You may see people discuss the 
four temperaments. Ultimately, there are many different ways that you can 
utilize to figure out the minds of others. Which you prefer is largely a 


matter of preference for yourself. 


What is Personality? 


Personality is, simply put, who you are as a person. When you are talking 
about personality, you are looking at the differences between how you may 
think, feel, and behave versus how other people choose to think, feel, and 
behave. It then takes into consideration how those three categories come 
together to make you as a whole. In general, you may hear people describe 
someone else as introverted or extraverted, or that they are bold and unique, 
or maybe timid. These are all characteristics that come together to create 


your own personality. 


Your personality traits come from several different aspects of life—some 
are genetic inheritances, others are genetic predispositions that required a 
certain sort of activation somewhere in life, and others still are simply 
learned responses to the world around you. Ultimately, when you want to 
look at your personality or the personality of other people, you will be 
looking at the Big Five Personality Traits. These can be remembered by the 
acronym OCEAN: 


e Openness to experience 

e Conscientiousness 

e Extraversion vs. introversion 
e Agreeableness 


e Neuroticism 


Each of these personality tendencies can help you understand who people 
are as a whole. Everyone will exhibit some level of each of these five traits 
—it will simply be a matter of figuring out if someone is entirely agreeable 


or entirely defiant, for example. When you understand someone’s 


tendencies within these five traits, you start to figure out their personality 


types. 


Openness 


This particular trait is crucial to imagination or being able to find insight. 
When someone happens to be highly open to experiences, they tend to be 
creative and adventurous. They are typically quite curious and want to learn 
more about the world around them. They are excited about exploring the 


world. 


However, those who score far lower on their openness to experience the 
world tend to be far more rigid. They like tradition and schedule and are 
aversive to change in general. They will resist anything that is unfamiliar 
and usually dislike when conversations or discussions lean toward 
theoretical. They want to live in comfort without worrying about what will 


happen next or how they will need to proceed throughout life. 


Conscientiousness 


This personality trait is all about how thoughtful someone is as an 
individual. It takes into consideration how likely someone is to be able to 
control their impulses or make sure that they are constantly working toward 
their goals. Those who are largely conscientious are usually the ones who 
pay meticulous attention to details. They feel the need to plan exactly how 
things will play out and always consider how other people are likely to feel 


as aresult of their own behaviors and tendencies. 


On the other hand, those who are not particularly conscientious are usually 
very dismissive of structure. Things will happen when they happen and not 
a moment sooner. They do not mind, and sometimes even prefer, the 
unpredictability of chaos and are usually not particularly disciplined. They 
will procrastinate or simply fail when it comes to achieving deadlines or 


goals. 


Extraversion 


This particular trait encompasses how one views being able to socialize 
with others. In particular, those who are extraverted tend to feel like they 
are energized by other people or engaging in social interaction. They tend to 


enjoy others and will go out of their way to get out and be social. 


Those who are not particularly extraverted are usually referred to as 
introverts, and introverts are typically quite reserved. They feel like they 
must expend energy when interacting and engaging with people out in 
public. Rather than being energized by social activity, they feel drained and 


often feel the need to retreat and relax. This does not mean that they are 


necessarily antisocial, but rather that socialization, no matter how enjoyed, 


is exhausting, and they need to spend the time to recharge after the fact. 


Agreeableness 


This trait looks at trust, kindness, and other behaviors that would be deemed 
prosocial. Effectively, they are happily cooperative and are willing to help 
others. In fact, they are usually quite empathetic and care strongly about 
how other people feel. They want to make sure that they are helping other 


people. 


On the other hand, people who are less agreeable typically care about and 
empathize less with those around them. They do not care much when they 
see people suffering and may even tend to manipulate others, having no 
problems with using other people to get what they want or need. All they 


care about is how they get what they want. 


Neuroticism 


The last trait is neuroticism—this looks at the emotional instability and 
moodiness of an individual. When you are highly neurotic, you are typically 
quite moody in general, with higher levels of anxiety or irritability. You 


may be easily upset and struggle to cope with stress when you are facing it. 


Those who are not neurotic; on the other hand, tend to be far more 
emotionally stable—they are resilient and relaxed. They are able to cope 
with stress as it arises without worrying too much about it. They can 


manage their own emotions and are rarely stuck in feelings of despair. 


Why Personality Matters 


Personality is crucial because it determines how people in the world 
interact. If you are neurotic, you are going to have a tendency to sway from 
emotion to emotion, and if you pair that with someone who is not agreeable, 
you may find that you are dealing with someone who does not care about 
prosocial behaviors while also oscillating from mood to mood. When you 
understand what someone’s tendencies are, you are prepared to deal with 
them. 

Beyond just that, however, personality determines how you will interact 
with the world and how those around you will also respond. When you can 
understand personality and the personality traits of other people, you can 
make sure that you can predict the behavioral patterns of other people. You 
can see how other people will react and in understanding that reaction, you 
will be able to understand what to expect in your own interactions with 
someone else. You will also be able to identify body language cues that may 


be important to know. 


Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 


Perhaps one of the more well-known personality type indicators out there is 
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI). This particular personality type 
indicator looks at four distinct modes of interacting with the world that 
combine to create 16 distinct personality types that all have their own 


tendencies and determinants. 


This particular personality type indicator works on introspective self- 
reporting, meaning that people are required to go through the test on their 
own and answer what they feel is the most accurate. Of course, this also 
means that it can be flawed sometimes—people can skew the test toward 
traits that they think they have or they wish they would have, and that can 
bring up some doubts on whether this is an effective or trustworthy way to 
analyze personality. Nevertheless, it is still useful to offer some insight into 


the minds of other people. 


The MBTI will look in particular at cognitive learning styles—this means 
that it is focused on how people interact with the world. It is important to 
recognize that the comparative pairs of traits are not meant to be seen as 
polar opposites but rather two ends of one spectrum in which the world is 
viewed. Some people can exist halfway through one category, balancing out 
in the middle, and someone who is largely on one end of the spectrum can 


exhibit traits that exist on the other as well. 


Introvert vs. Extravert 


The first learning style that is looked at is the introvert versus the extravert. 
In particular, when you are looking at the MBTI, you are going to see the 
spelling of “extravert,” though it is commonly spelled as extrovert in 
several other sources. Nevertheless, this particular type looks to see how 


people learn in regards to social interactions. 


People on the extravert end of the spectrum usually learn well by 
interacting with the world around them. They look to the physical world 
around them in order to figure out what is happening. They are more likely 
to require being able to touch and feel things rather than simply 


contemplating it, and they are happy to process in person. 


People on the introvert end of the spectrum, on the other hand, prefer to 
reflect in peace and quiet. They do not require the physical aspect to 
learning and do better oftentimes when they are able to internally grapple 
with a concept. They prefer to process internally as opposed to the 


extravert’s external preference. 


Sensing vs. Intuition 


The next spectrum that is identified is the spectrum between sensing and 
intuition. This is where people tend to focus their attention in order to 
understand the world around them. It determines whether people are 


interested in the physical versus the abstract. 


In particular, those on the sensing end of the spectrum tend to favor the 
concrete and tangible. They want to see the results and have the evidence in 


their hands and available to them. There is a major preference toward 


details and sequences, and they want to focus on what is in front of them 


rather than abstract or hypotheticals. 


The intuition end of the spectrum, on the other hand, involves people that 
are good at understanding and grappling with the hypothetical and abstract. 
They do not feel the need to have something in front of them, and would 


rather contemplate what is happening rather than have to interact physically. 


Thinking vs. Feeling 


The third spectrum identifies the preferences used during decision making. 
This particular spectrum seeks to identify whether people are more likely to 
make a decision based on their emotions or versus looking at things 
logically and rationally. Both forms of thinking have their own important 


purposes, and it is ultimately a matter of looking at the preference. 


People on the thinking end of the spectrum usually look at cold logic and 
truth. Feelings have nothing to do with their decisions, and they will always 
look to make objective decisions based upon the truth and evidence that 
they have in front of them. They are interested in logic and deduction and 
will go with the logical decision, no matter how much they may dislike the 


implications or the feelings that go along with it. 


The people on the feeling end, however, tend to emphasize the emotions 
that go along with their decision. They will look at situations in much more 
nuanced ways, taking a look at the reason behind why someone did 


something rather than simply judging it to be black or white. 


For example, the thinker may say that the person who was stealing is a 
criminal who deserves to be prosecuted accordingly, while the feeler may 
point out that the person stole a loaf of bread to feed his children, and that 
leniency is in order. They are both looking at the same problem, but the 
thinker believes that things must be logical and follow the rules, meaning 
the man is guilty no matter what and deserves the same punishment as the 
people who have stolen for gain rather than to simply survive, while the 


feeler cares about the motives. 


Judging vs. Perceiving 


Finally, the fourth spectrum seeks to identify how people tend to regard 
complexity in the world. People tend to approach the world in different 
manners, with some choosing a structured, logical manner, while others 


prefer to go with the flow. 


In particular, those who are on the judging end of the spectrum prefer to 
have a structure to their approach to the world. They enjoy having protocols 
in place and a pattern for how they will get through the world around them. 


This structure is used as their guide and helps them know what to expect. 


On the perceiving end, however, people prefer to keep things open. They 
want to be able to have options that will allow for change if it is needed. 
While the judging types will try to fit new information into their 
understanding of the world and its structures, the perceivers are more likely 
to change without needing any sort of previous structure. They are willing 


to go with the flow. 


The MBTI Personality Types 


INTJ: The Architect: These people are imaginative and tend to 
do well with strategy. They are able to develop plans with ease 
and prefer to always have plans. They question everything as they 
observe the world around them. 

INTP: The Logician: This personality type is categorized as 
being skilled at analysis. These people are able to analyze quickly 
and then use those analyses to ensure that they are able to achieve 
what they set out to do with the possible success 

ENTJ: The Commander: Those with the ENTJ personality 
types are typically comfortable in a leadership position. They are 
willing to take charge and are particularly skilled in structure. 
They typically are driven by ambition and are optimistic and 
comfortable in making decisions quickly. 

ENTP: The Debater: This personality type is driven by the 
ability to have conversations and learn. They love to engage with 
other people, welcome challenge and like to look at the world 
through logic while inviting others to join them as well. 

INF J: The Advocate: The INFJ is all about helping other people. 
This person has a kind nature and tends to reflect. They are 
creative and are willing to look at the world with uniquely 
idealistic perspectives. Usually, these people are visionaries 
INFP: The Mediator: These people are usually interested in 
figuring out what the meaning of the world is. They are usually 
quite sensitive and prefer to spend time at home on their own, 
allowing their imaginations to run wild. Usually, these people are 


reserved and interested in pursuing their values. 


ENFJ: The Protagonist: The ENFJ is usually driven by 
principles. They are charismatic and find it easy to relate to others 
while still maintaining their idealistic values. They are usually 
quite outspoken. 

ENFP: The Campaigner: This personality type focuses on 
creating the path to the life they wish to live. They are interested 
in beginning new projects while also seeing the potential that 
other people possess, encouraging, and fostering it. 

ISTJ: The Logistician: Those with this personality type tend to 
be incredibly organized and driven to work hard. They are 
attentive and are skilled in managing their social and cultural 
responsibilities. Usually, these people are interested in thinking 
deeply to identify clearly what is right. They are usually 
trustworthy and reserved, but also intimidating to those that they 
do not know. 

ISFJ: The Defender: This personality type is determined to help 
other people. They are usually quite warm and nurturing while 
also sensitive. They are usually deemed to be loyal, generous, and 
considerate. 

ESTJ: The Executive: The ESTJ personality type is 
characterized by being traditional and deeply driven by their 
desire to follow those values they hold dear. They are usually 
quite happy to lead other people and asked for help regularly 
because their advice is typically deemed to be orderly and result- 
oriented. 

ESFJ: The Consul: This personality type is identified as being 
entirely comfortable being in the limelight. They enjoy social 


interaction and do everything in their power to be liked. They are 


usually quite gracious and thoughtful, along with being interested 
in helping everyone around them. 

ISTP: The Virtuoso: These people are driven by their desire to 
be rational. They observe the world around them and then figure 
out how best to reply rationally. They are usually incredibly 
spontaneous, bringing with them enthusiasm with a side of 
pragmatism. 

ISFP: The Adventurer: These people tend to be good at 
listening and focus on being a good friend. They may struggle 
with that initial connection to others, but once it is made, they 
value making sure that they and those around them are at peace. 
ESTP: The Entrepreneur: These people are the doers—they are 
willing to go out and do new things. They enjoy spending their 
time with other people and do not want to have to be bothered 
with the details. They are good at solving pragmatic problems and 
negotiating, but they are also usually deemed to be quite 
impulsive and unconventional. 

ESFP: The Entertainer: This personality type is characterized 
by the ability to bring energy to any event. They are good at 
interacting with other people, and those skills make them 
incredibly beneficial to be around. They are usually quite 


sympathetic and thoughtful about the world around them. 


Identifying Personality Types 


Though most of the time, proper types are determined by the active analysis 
of a test that the individual themselves fills out, you can also usually piece 
together what the most likely personality type of someone else is just by 
comparing which characteristics that particular person seems to have more 
of. In order to determine which category someone falls into, try to figure 
out which side of the spectrum fits that person better 


Extravert Introvert 
* Energized by others e Drained by others 
* Focused on the external e Focuses on the internal 
* Regularly makes contact world 
with others that may or e Prefers solitude to 
may not be necessary groups 


* Prefers to communicate 
one-on-one instead of in 


groups 
e Focuses on numbers © Insightful and 
e Prefers specifics prefers to internally 
e Is interested in mull over issues 
results and the © Relies on insights 
presentrather than e Focuses on the 
abstract future 


e Practical 


Thinking Feeling 


* Focused on reasoning * Focuses on the emotions 
and logic and reason why people 
e Objective and do things 
impersonal * Placesemphasison 
e Gives more emphasis on sympathy and concern 
logical analysis in for others 
problem -solving * Uses gut feelings and 
morality to debate over 
choices 
¢ The thinker tends to ¢ The feeler tends to let 
identify reasoning his heart guide the 
behind committing a way when debating a 
crime-- rather than situation. They will 
punishing, the thinker make concessions if it 
encourages good is a unique situation 


decision making 


Chapter 3: Verbal vs. Nonverbal Communication 


Imagine that you are trying to send an important message to someone. How 
should you go about delivering it? It is difficult to know how best to convey 
a message to someone else, especially if you find that you will need to 
convey some sort of bad news to the other party. When that happens, your 
best interest is often in making sure that there is no miscommunication, 


meaning that you want to be there in person. 


Think about when the police are tasked with delivering the bad news of 
informing someone that their loved one has been found dead—they go in 
person. This is to make sure that the message is heard while also ensuring 


that there is no miscommunication. 


When you communicate in any other way than physically with someone 
else, you run the risk of miscommunication simply because so much is 
conveyed through nonverbal cues. This means that if you were to send an 
email with just the words in front of you, the message may be taken 
drastically differently than it would have been if you had chosen to say it in 


person. 


As social creatures, you have to communicate regularly with other people, 
and you do so, almost all of the time. Even not doing or saying anything is 
communicating something to someone else. The problem is, most of the 
time, we tend to ignore or disregard nonverbal communication, simply 
because so much of it is interpreted unconsciously. You may not be aware 
of it, but you are constantly cueing into how other people speak to you, 


approach you, or even look at you. 


Communication is so intrinsic to our ability to relate to other people, and 
yet most people do not understand the effort that goes into it. People do not 
realize or recognize how intricate the art of communication is, and they 
simply take it for granted. That means, then, that they also have a tendency 
to miss out on important cues that would otherwise help immensely when it 


comes to understanding and interacting with others. 


Within this chapter, you will be provided with a crash-course into 
understanding communication. In particular, we will take a look at the 
differences between verbal and nonverbal communication, allowing you to 
begin to understand the difference between the two. You will see an 
overview of each of the types of communication and what they entail. For 
example, you will learn what is meant when someone refers to vocalics 


versus verbal communication—there is a difference between the two. 


As you read this, you will be given all of the pertinent information you will 
need to proceed with learning to read and understand body language. This 
will provide you with far more insight than you otherwise would have 
developed if you had simply been given a list of which actions mean what. 
This is imperative if you want to have a solid understanding of people and 


how communication truly works. 


Communication 


Communication, when simplified, is the idea that two people or beings are 
able to convey messages to one another in order to share thoughts or ideas. 
However, there is so much more that goes into communication than simply 
assuming that if you say one word, I understand it. There are seven stages 
to communication with an eighth element interfering with the entire 
process. Within this section, you will be guided through understanding the 


eight elements of communication. 


E meee 


a 


Encoding the 
message 


Thereceiver SS Decoding the 
ahi m message 


Feedback 


Channeling 


the message 


pup 


The sender 


The sender is the individual that is conveying a message. This is the 
original source of the communication that is being sent. The sender is the 
one who decides what it is that they want to communicate to the other party. 
The sender may feel the desire to communicate with the other party and 
needs to figure out how best to go about the process. 


For example, imagine that your friend has come to your house and has 


brought a delicious cake. You took a bite and really enjoyed it. You now 


have a desire to communicate with your friend. This makes you the sender. 


The message 


With the desire to send a message in mind, you now must figure out what 
the message that you wish to convey is. Perhaps you have a deep-seated 
feeling of joy after taking a bite of that cake, feeling entirely satisfied. You 
decide that you wish to convey that satisfaction to your friend in order to 
make sure that they know that you truly appreciated the deliciousness of the 


cake that they provided for you. 


Encoding the message 


With your message in mind, you now must figure out how best to convey 
that message. This is where encoding the message comes into play. You 
must look at the situation and your receiver in order to figure out exactly 
how you should be communicating. Can you communicate it in words? Will 
you be able to use a verbal language? Which language is the most effective 
here? If you speak English and Spanish, but your friend that made the cake 
only speaks English, you likely would not choose Spanish as your language 
of choice to convey that message. You want to ensure that your language is 
encoded in a way that will be understood by the receiver, no matter how 
you may choose to channel the message. Here, you decide that your 


message is, “I really like this cake!” 


Channeling the message 


With your message chosen, you must now figure out how best to channel 
the message. This is determining how you are sending the message. Is it 
told face-to-face? Are you sending a text message? Perhaps you will write a 
note. Are you saying it out loud, or handing a quick note? No matter how 
you choose to convey it, what you are sending is the message of, “I really 
like this cake!” 


The receiver 


With the message channeled, it should now be provided for your receiver. 
This means that the other person has, in fact, received the message and will 


now be responsible for the other half of the communication process. 


Decoding the message 


Upon receiving the message, the receiver must figure out how to decode it. 
This means that the receiver must figure out what was meant to be 
conveyed. They are able to understand the message so they can respond 
accordingly. At this point, your friend hears your message and processes the 
channeled message. This is the stage where your friend understands that 


you liked the cake and is happy himself. 


Feedback 


After understanding the message, the receiver then responds to it somehow, 
marking the beginning of the process all over again. This means that the 
communication process functions largely as a cycle, in which people 


convey messages, have them understood, and then have the messages 


responded to in a constant back and forth exchange until the communication 


session is Over. 


Noise 


Finally, noise refers to anything that will interfere with the communication 
session. For example, you may have literal loud noises interfering, making 
communication impossible between yourself and the other party. There may 
be bad weather that is making your phone reception spotty, meaning the 
phone call continuously drops on you. You may try to send a message via 
text-to-speak technology on your phone and have it completely bungle the 
message. You may have an incredibly thick accent that makes you difficult 
to understand. All of these are examples of noise that would interfere with 


your communication. 


The example given above was an example of verbal communication. 
However, the same order follows for nonverbal communication. Think 
about a dog wagging its tail. The dog is the sender. It has a feeling of being 
happy and then figures out how best to communicate that message. The dog 
then wags its tail to communicate to others that it is happy, who then 
receives the message, and acknowledge that the dog is, in fact, happy. Of 
course, when it is nonverbal communication, it is not usually quite as 


intentional consciously. 


Verbal Communication 


We will first address verbal communication. When you are using verbal 
language, you are using the use of words or sounds in order to express a 
message in some way. Perhaps the most notable feature of verbal 
communication is that it is largely arbitrary and requires learning in order to 
truly understand it. Verbal communication, then, is learned and specific to 
certain groups. This is exemplified by the fact that humans have several 
different languages that are rather clustered based on geography. People 
within one geographic language tend to speak the same language as each 
other, though there are always exceptions. 


Verbal communication is any form of communication that relies on words 
—arbitrary sounds meant to define or convey a very specific idea. For 
example, in English, we may say that a cat is a cat. The process of making 
the word cat tells anyone else that speaks English that you are referring to a 
small, fuzzy, four-legged feline with whiskers and a tail that is commonly 
kept as a house pet. If you were to say cat to someone who does not 
understand a word of English, such as someone who speaks Spanish, they 
would not understand what you meant by the word, “Cat.” However, if you 


pointed at a cat, they would probably say the word, “Gato,” in response, 
while someone who spoke French may say, “Chat,” and someone who 


spoke German would say, “Katze.” 


At the end of the day, cat, gato, chat, and Katze all refer to that quadrupedal, 
fluffy feline with the long tail and whiskers. They all share that common 
meaning, though they are all said entirely differently from one another. This 


is because they are all speaking different languages. 


Verbal communication is not limited solely to the words that you speak, 
either—it also encompasses written communication, as you are still using 
arbitrary symbols to represent a concept that you would not be able to 
clearly define otherwise. Along with written language, you may also see 
sign language. Though commonly lumped into nonverbal communication 
due to a lack of using the voice and relying on gestures, sign language still 
classifies as verbal simply because it is still making use of arbitrary signs 
and symbols that are meant to represent a concept that would not be 
innately understood by those around you if they did not have prior 
knowledge of the language. 


Nonverbal Communication 


Nonverbal communication, on the other hand, is far more innate. For the 
most part, nonverbal communication is largely understood across borders. 
There are always certain aspects of nonverbal communication that are 
cultural, such as avoiding eye contact in the United States is deemed as rude 
while other cultures would deem you rude for making eye contact in the 
first place. 


Beyond some of the specific meanings that are cultural, however, most of 
the nonverbal communication cues that will be discussed in the next chapter 
are largely universal. When you are communicating nonverbally, you are 
focusing on how to interact with someone else without words. Think about 
a smile—no matter the culture you are from, you should be able to 
understand that a smile is a sign of kindness or happiness, no matter where 


you were from. 


In particular, nonverbal communication is commonly broken down into five 


categories that define different aspects: Kinesics, oculesics, haptics, 


proxemics, and vocalics. All of these will convey a certain message without 
the use of any words. 


Writing 


i Kinesics 
Communication 


Nonverbal 


Kinesics 


When you think about nonverbal communication, the first thing that comes 
to mind is probably kinesics—this is the way you move your body. This 
would encompass the way you move, how you express yourself, and how 
you hold yourself. You will effectively be looking at the position someone 
will take when facing you, whether they are facing you with their whole 
body or not, or even what they may be doing at the time. You can tell a lot 
about how someone is moving their body, from whether they are looking 
uncomfortable to whether they seem thrilled to be there. 


Most of the time, people assume this is all there is to nonverbal 
communication. They think that if they learn to understand what people 


mean when they move their bodies in certain ways, they know everything 


they need to know about the situation or person. However, there are other 


important aspects to remember, as well. 


This is, however, the most likely thing you will first notice when you 
approach someone else. You will identify how they are holding their body 
and what they seem to be paying attention to. You will be looking at the 
head and expressions, the shoulders, the hands and arm, the direction the 
body is facing, and the legs and feet. As you learn to read people, you will 
find that you need to read people from the feet up in order to truly 


understand them quickly. 


Oculesics 


Technically a subset of kinesics, oculesics looks at the movements and 
motions of the eyes. Despite being a subset of kinesics, it will be provided 
its own category simply because eye contact and eye movements can be so 
defining. There are several ways that you can choose to look at other people 


and several more ways that your eyes can also move as well. 


In particular, you will look at eye contact, the direction of the gaze, how the 
eye is moving, and the dilation of the pupils. Each aspect of how the eye is 
behaving will provide new snippets of information that can then be 
clustered together to get a clearer picture of what is going on in mind 
behind them. 


Haptics 


Haptics is just a fancy way to refer to touch between people. Think about 
the touch screen on your phone or tablet—that uses haptic feedback when it 
makes a slight clicking feeling to let you know that your press on something 
was received. It is also used when playing video games on a console that 


also makes use of vibrating controllers. 


Haptics in body language is not much different—when you are speaking 
about nonverbal communication haptics, you are referring to how people 
use their touch to communicate with others. This may be a quick touch to 
the shoulder to be reassuring, or a firm handshake in order to greet a 
prospective client. No matter the form, it is any sort of touch between 
people and how that touch is conveyed. Think of the act of touching 
someone’s face, for example. If your spouse lovingly reaches out and 
caresses your cheek, you will likely feel loved and cared for. However, if a 
stranger were to reach out and touch your face, you would likely cringe 
away. If that stranger were to reach out and slap at the face instead of 
reaching out to caress it, you would likely feel offended and angry. All three 
examples were different examples of touching one’s hand to someone else’s 


face, and yet they all three had different contexts, meanings, and reactions. 


When you are talking about haptics, you will be looking primarily at where 
you are being touched and the intention behind the touch. Your touch, when 
slow and gentle, may be perceived as comforting, whereas the same 
position to touch but done with force is going to be deemed an assault or 


attempt to hurt you. 


Proxemics 


Proxemics is all about learning the proximity between yourself and other 
people. When you are looking at proxemics, in particular, you may notice 
that the other party is likely to position him or herself in very specific 
places in relation to you, and if you encroach on their personal bubble, they 
will likely shift back in order to provide that space that they wanted in the 


first place. 


When you are considering proxemics, you are going to look at the direction 
of interaction on two planes—you will be looking at how the other person 
holds themselves vertically, referring to whether they are making it a point 
to look up or down at you. For example, are they intentionally tilting their 
heads up so they can look down their nose at you, or are they getting down 


to eye level for a child to speak and communicate clearly? 


Proxemics also looks at horizontal distance between people. This is to 
figure out how far apart you situation yourself from other people and how 
you will interact with people in regards to the distance that you set. If you 
are very firmly maintaining a distance between yourself and the other party, 
there is likely a good reason—you feel like that relationship is not built up 
enough yet. On the other hand, a married couple may very well seem like 
they want no space between them—because their relationship allows for 


that intimacy. 
Vocalics 
Finally, the last aspect of nonverbal communication to be discussed will be 


vocalics. When considering vocalics, you will be looking at how people 


want to communicate with each other via their voice without ever actually 


using words. This, in particular, is looking at the different sorts of sounds 
that people make to convey a meaning without there being a word. For 
example, a growl is going to be well understood as someone who is 
frustrated or angry, whereas sighing implies that there is something wrong 
or amiss. 

Vocalics seeks to analyze all of those sounds that are made. Because these 
are not arbitrary noises or symbols meant to represent a concept, they are 
considered a part of nonverbal communication, despite the fact that they are 


other forms of vocalizations. 


Chapter 4: Reading Body Language 


Now, imagine that you are standing in front of someone. You can see that 
they are crossing their arms with hands hidden behind them, their eyes 
shifting nervously from you to veer off to the left every now and then. They 
shift their weight from foot to foot and struggle to maintain eye contact. 
Something about the body language of this person makes you uneasy, but 
you cannot place it. They are keeping their distance from you, and every 


time you approach closer, you notice that they are likely to move away. 


Body language is good at giving us feelings that tell us to be on edge, 
offended, or relaxed, but if you do not know what you are reading, you are 
going to struggle to understand why you are feeling that way. It can be 
difficult to know what someone intends if you cannot put meaning to what 
they are doing. You can have a general idea of how you want to respond, 
but it can be incredibly beneficial to be able to read the language of 


someone else. 


This chapter will take you on a breakdown of the most common body 
language usage that you are likely to run into. You will be introduced to the 
kinesics, which will take the vast majority of this chapter, learning to 
interpret what is intended by the various body movements that you will 
encounter. You will learn what the most common expressions are and how 
people hold themselves. You will learn how to read oculesics in order to 
understand what the eye contact of other people means. You will see what is 


meant in proxemics, vocalics, and haptics, as well. 


By the time you have finished this chapter, you should have a solid 


foundation in reading common body language and behaviors. Keep in mind 
that this list is not complete—this is simply focusing on the most common 
behaviors. After all, it would take an entire book to go over every sort of 


nonverbal communication cue that humans can give off! 


Kinesics 


As a brief reminder, kinesics refers to the movements of the body. In 
particular, here, you will be looking at how people make expressions, 
learning about the seven universal expressions that transcend borders. You 
will then look at common facial movements. From there, you will work 
your way down the body, looking at shoulders, arms, and hands, and then 
the legs and feet. 


Expressions 


Expressions are what people usually think of when they are asked to 
envision body language—they may think of the smile of happiness or the 
furrow of brows in sadness. Nevertheless, being able to read this body 
language is critical. This is effectively a guide to several clusters of body 
language of the face to identify the emotional state of someone else. In 
particular, we are going to identify the expressions that match the seven 
universal emotions of happiness, sadness, anger, fear, surprise, contempt, 
and disgust. Keep in mind that each of these emotions will have their own 
purposes of existing, and each feeling will be noticeable based upon the 


expressions on the face. Of course, you can hide or fake these, but there are 


usually cues or microexpressions that cannot be faked or hidden. 


e Happiness: Happiness is usually quite simple to identify—the 
face will be far more relaxed, and you will see that the individual 
is smiling—the corners of the mouth will pull upwards and back. 
The mouth may be parted to expose the teeth or it may be closed, 
and you will be able to identify a wrinkle from the nose to the 
outer lip, raising up the cheeks. The lower eyelid usually wrinkles 
or tenses up, and in a genuine smile, you will see the wrinkle on 
the outer corners of the eyes. When happiness is faked, there will 
be less tension in the face, and you will not see the wrinkle in the 
corners of the eyes. 

e Sadness: When identifying sadness, you will notice that the 
individual’s inner corners of the eyebrows raise up and inward, 
creating wrinkles. The lips pull down into a frown, and the jaw is 
usually tensed and pulled upward. The bottom lip may even pout 
out. Of all the expressions, this is the hardest to actually fake. 

e Anger: Anger usually is noted by the lowered brows, designed to 
hood the eyes. They are typically drawn together, creating 
wrinkles between them. The lower eyelid is usually tensed, and 
the eyes will typically stare intensely at whatever the object of the 
anger is. The lips may be pressed together tightly, or they will be 
opened into a square if the individual is yelling. The nostrils may 
dilate with breathing, and the lower jaw is oftentimes forced 
outward. 

e Fear: Fear is usually noticed by eyebrows that are raised up and 


pulled inward toward each other. They are most commonly 


straight rather than curved or arched. There are usually wrinkles 
in the forehead that are mostly in the center rather than all the 
way across. The eyes will be opened widely, though you will only 
see whites over the top of the iris rather than around the whole 
thing. The mouth is typically hanging open, but there is tension 
around the lips, tensing them up and pulling them back slightly. 

e Surprise: This particular emotion is most commonly expressed 
with raised and rounded eyebrows—the arches will be curved. 
The skin underneath the brow will be stretched out as a result of 
the brows being raised, and you will often see wrinkles across the 
forehead as a result. The eyes are opened wide, and you can 
usually see whites of the eye above and below the eye. The mouth 
regularly hangs open with the teeth apart, though there is no 
tension held here. It seems to just hang open. 

e Contempt: Of all of the expressions, contempt is the simplest 
.Usually, most of the face is neutral, though you may be stared at 
with slightly lowered eyes. The most defining feature of 
contempt, however, is the slight twitch upwards of one side of the 
mouth in a sort of smirk. 

e Disgust: Disgust is usually characterized as a lowering of the 
brows, with a wrinkle between the two. Usually, the upper lip has 
been raised, allowing it to lift up toward the nostrils to shield 
them. The cheeks pull up as well toward the ears, and the nose is 
typically wrinkled. You will likely be able to see the upper teeth 


as the mouth opens. 


Reading the brows 


The eyebrows are incredibly expressive and can be moved in a multitude of 
ways. This section will guide you through the most common movements 


that the eyebrows can make. 


e Knitting the brows: Oftentimes, if the brows become knitted 
together, it is meant to convey concern, sadness, or confusion. 
You will usually see some sort of wrinkling in between the two 
that will give this away. 

e Lowering the brows: When you see that the brows are simply 
lowered down, hooding over the eyes, you may be dealing with 
someone interested in hiding from the situation at hand. This 
becomes even truer if the individual is dropping his or her head as 
well. This can be indicative of an attempt to be deceptive. 

e Lowering the middle of the brows: When you make it a point to 
lower the middle of the brows, you create a straight brow instead 
of one that naturally curves. Usually, this shows anger or 
frustration and occasionally fear as well, especially when paired 
with raising the brows while flattening the centers. 

e Raising the brows: When the brows raise upwards, typically, you 
are looking at someone that is surprised, attracted to the other 


party, or even submissive and hoping to not draw any 
unnecessary or unwanted attention. 

Raising the middle of the brows: When you raise the middle of 
your brows up, you are showing that you are surprised or 
relieved, with the true meaning being entirely dependent upon the 
other signs that are present as well. 

Raising a single brow: When you raise a single brow up, you are 


usually showing contempt, disbelief, or cynicism. 


Reading the mouth 


The mouth can tell a lot beyond just the words that come out of it when 


communicating. When you look at someone’s mouth, you can usually pick 


up a few details about what they want or what they are attempting to do. 


Baring the teeth: When you see someone baring teeth, they are 
either smiling, or they are snarling, something that would be 
considered quite negative. Depending on context, it is either 
aggressive or pleasant. 

Biting the lip and cheek: Typically considered a nervous habit, 
people tend to chew on their lip or cheek in an attempt to soothe 
themselves when nervous. However, it is also regularly associated 
with deception, as it can be done in an attempt to hide something. 
Parting the lips: When you allow your lips to part, you may be 
trying to get the attention of someone else, or you may be 
interested in trying to flirt or show that you are attracted to them. 
Relaxing the lips: When this happens, the individual is typically 


sitting, calm, and relaxed. 


Touching the mouth: This is a common sign of self-soothing or 
deception 

Twitch of the lips: This can happen due to either feeling 
contemptuous or as a result of trying to suppress some other 


emotion from showing on the face. 


Arm movements 


People can move their arms and hands in several different manners, all of 


which show different meanings and can convey different levels of 


contempt, contentment, or annoyance. Take a look at these common arm 


and hand movements. 


Crossing the arms: When this happens, the most common reason 
is that the person is being defensive or closed off. This conveys 
that the individual wants as much between you and him as 
possible. 

Expanding the arms: Arms can be expanded out or pulled 
inward to either make you look larger or smaller. When the arms 
are expanded outward, it is usually a display of feeling 
comfortable in the setting and being relaxed. On the other hand, 
when they are drawn inward, it is usually due to some sort of 
stress. 

Holding the arms still: When arms are held entirely still, it is 
typically because it is an attempt to ensure that they do not hide 
anything. When someone’s arms are resting motionlessly at the 
side, you can assume it is an attempt to deceive you. You may 
even see the individual literally gripping the arms to keep them 


perfectly still. 


Pulling the arms back: When you see someone with their arms 
and shoulders pulled back, it is typically due to them attempting 
to protect themselves. They want to make themselves less 
exposed and vulnerable to some sort of attack or attempt to grab 
them. 

Raising the arms up: This is typically reserved for an 
exaggeration of some sort. It can be meant to exaggerate 


whatever emotion is being felt at that particular moment. 


Hand movements 


Along with the arms, the hands are incredibly easy to maneuver. This, 


paired with plenty of points of articulation, leads to an ability to create 


several different positions with different meanings. 


Behind the back: This can oftentimes imply confidence—it 
makes the individual vulnerable, exposing the chest, and is a sign 
that the individual is not afraid of anyone in the surroundings. 
Clenched into fists: When you clench your hands into fists, you 
are showing that you are firm in whatever you are saying. You are 
showing signs of stubbornness, and possibly even aggression, 
depending upon what you can pair with that particular action. 
Direction of the palms: When you have your hands outstretched, 
the direction of the palm matters. When the palm is downward, 
you are showing that you are in control and asserting yourself 
over the situation. When they are upwards, however, you are 
showing that you are approachable and deserving of trust. 

In the pockets: When you put your hands in your pockets, you 


are showing some level of discomfort or reluctance toward the 


situation that you are in. 

e On the heart: Often used to show that you are honest. However, 
this is regularly and readily falsified, so you should always look 
for signs of truthfulness or deception when you see this. 

e On the hips: This regularly is seen as aggressive, despite being 
intended to show readiness thanks to the fact that it is easy to shift 
into almost any different position. 

e Pointing: This is typically reserved for authoritative situations. 
Think of the disapproving teacher scolding a student with a finger 
out. It can also be done toward people who are your peers for an 
extra-confrontational approach. 

e Rubbing them together: When you rub your hands together, you 
are seen as waiting in anticipation for something, whether that is 
to get what you wanted or because you are unsure of the bad 
news you are about to get. 

e Steepled: When you steeple your hands together, you are resting 
your fingertips against each other while your palms remain 
parallel from each other, never touching. The only points of 


contact between your hands are your fingertips. 


Legs and feet movements 


When people are trying to disguise their own movement, most often, it is 
done through the upper body and expressions. However, people do not 
realize that their legs actually tell an immense amount of information about 
the individual at hand. People who are trying to hide their body language 
regularly leave their legs and feet uncensored, meaning that you should 


look there to see true intentions and interests. 


Crossing the legs: When you stand with crossed legs, you are 
usually either showing shyness or coyness, but it is quite 
submissive thanks to the fact that the entire pose is rather 
unstable. 

Direction of the feet: Wherever the individual’s feet are pointing, 
you can assume that what they want is there. They will direct 
their feet to whatever it is that they want, whether intentional or 
not. If their feet are pointed toward you, they are interested in 
engaging. If they point toward someone else or toward the door, 
you can assume that they wish for the entire interaction to end. 
Genital emphasis: This is usually done with men with a wide 
stance and thumbs stuffed into pockets, with the hands pointing 
downward to naturally gesture toward the crotch. This is done to 


display dominance and confidence. 


Opened legs: When people’s legs are open or spaced 


comfortably, you can tell that they are quite open to continuing 


engagement. Usually, a good rule for the distance between the 
feet is shoulder-width shows openness. Closer together typically 
implies being nervous or uninterested in continuing contact. 

Toes up: People generally will have their toes point upward when 
they are content, especially if they are simply standing still at that 


moment. 


Oculesics 


The eyes are, in many ways, the windows to the soul. They are incredibly 
expressive, despite having so few ways to move. When you want to look at 
how the eyes express themselves, you are primarily looking at the direction 
of the gaze, the amount of eye contact is made, the movements of the eyes, 
and the dilation of the pupils. 


Direction of gaze 


Gaze refers to the direction that you are looking—it is the focus of your 
eyes. When you gaze at something, you are looking intently at it. You may 
gaze at other people or objects. It is usually closely related to whatever you 
want at that moment. As a general rule of thumb, the more you look at 
something, the more you want it. You will generally disregard things that 
you do not care about in favor of looking at things that catch your eye and 


your attention. 


Eye contact 


Eye contact is a major component of being able to communicate effectively 


with other people. When you make good eye contact with other people, you 


let them know that you are listening to them. However, the intensity of eye 


contact can mean different things to different people. As a quick aside, 


please note that while ample eye contact is recommended in Western 


cultures, it is usually seen to be problematic in many others. 


Regular, relaxed eye contact: Regular eye contact is usually met 
with several breaks to the eye contact as well. There are ample 
pauses in which you or the other person glance away, but eye 
contact is restored after a moment. This means that you are 
contentedly communicating with someone else. 

Harsh, staring eye contact: This can be disciplinarian, 
threatening, or just authoritarian, depending on the context. 
Usually, this is the kind of eye contact that will make people 
uncomfortable. This is the kind that is usually joined with a scowl 
or a blank face without wavering. 

Avoiding eye contact: When eye contact is avoided repeatedly, it 
is usually a sign of some sort of discomfort—usually, it involves 
someone not wanting to engage in any interaction. It can be 
indicative of deception, especially if in conjunction with other 
deceptive behaviors. 

Forced, uncomfortable eye contact: When the eye contact is 
forced but feels unnatural, it could also be indicative of deception. 
People know that they are expected to make eye contact with 
other people and that not making eye contact is a sign of lying, so 


they overcorrect and stare, but that stands out just as much. 


Eye movements 


Eyes can move in several different ways—they can wink, blink, close, or 


remain open. They can shift around and do much more. In particular, when 


you look at the movements of the eye, you are looking for: 


Blinking: Blinking normally is usually a sign of relaxation. Rapid 
blinking, on the other hand, shows that the individual does not 
want to see what is in front of them, or that they are attempting to 
hide. It usually shows some sign of stress. 

Closing: When you close your eyes, you are implying that you 
want to hide. You want to avoid the world around you at all costs, 
so you close your eyes to drown out what is in front of you. This 
allows you to think deeply or to simply remove distractions. 
Crying: This usually implies intense emotion, usually in anger, 
sadness, or fear. Of course, people can also cry when they are 
overcome by happiness as well. 

Winking: Winking shows some sort of camaraderie of sorts— 
when you wink at someone, you make it known that you and the 


other person are in on the same joke. 


Pupil dilation 


Pupil dilation is tough to spot but entirely impossible to control consciously. 


This means that whatever the pupils are doing is directly indicative of the 


mindset of the individual moving them. Eyes tend to dilate for several 


reasons, such as: 


The usage of drugs: Several drugs will alter the pupil’s ability to 
contract and expand effectively. 

Interest or attraction: When you are attracted to someone else, 
the pupils naturally expand. This is why lovesick cartoon 


drawings typically have the big, exaggerated pupils, and is also 


responsible for why cats’ eyes tend to dilate before they pounce 
on something. 

Intensive thought: When you are thinking intently about 
something, whether it is a complex math problem or simply 
something that you are seriously considering, there is usually a 
slight change in the dilation of your pupils. 

In response to the light: This is what most people think of when 
they see pupil dilation—the pupils will contract in bright light and 
expand in the darkness. 

In response to a head injury: Head injuries that have caused a 
concussion or other serious injuries oftentimes present with 
altered function of the pupils and require immediate medical 


attention. 


Haptics 


This is a fancy word for how you touch other people. In particular, you will 


be looking at the area in which you are touching someone else. There are 


areas on the body that are deemed acceptable for touch from just about 


anyone and other areas that are reserved for intimate touches of a spouse or 


lover. There are five different categories that are used to understand touch 


between people as a form of communication: 


Sexual: This is the most intimate of touch—it is reserved for your 
partners or lovers. In particular, this is touch that is meant to 
convey your intimacy, either to achieve an end goal of sexual 
intimacy or to use in comfort or bonding, such as attempting to 
calm someone down with a hug, a kiss, and a massage. 

Love: This touch is far more frequent than many others, but is not 
quite intimate—it is usually a sign that you are connected to 
someone else. For example, walking down the street while 
holding someone else’s hand is usually an implication that you 
are in a relationship with them. This generally encompasses 
touches such as a hand around the waist, holding hands, or a 
quick kiss to the head or cheek. 

Friendship: This is touch that is welcome between friends—it is 
typically more common in women than men just because men 
tend to see it as a form of dominance, while women see it as 
camaraderie. This touch may be, for example, a quick hug 
between friends or a pat on the shoulder by a friend or family 


member. 


Social: A social touch is one that is generally considered 
acceptable no matter who the toucher is. For example, it may be a 
pat to the forearm, which is seen as polite and acceptable, even 
amongst strangers in some areas. So long as the touch is in a non- 
vulnerable body part, such as the hand, arm, shoulder, and the 
upper back, it is generally acceptable. All other parts of the body 
are considered vulnerable and are reserved for people that 
actually have a relationship. 

Functional: This is any touch that is intentional and done with 
purpose. These may be handshakes or attempts to communicate 
with a pat on the shoulder. They are usually seen from a person in 
power toward a subordinate, without the converse being 
acceptable in many times. For example, praise plus a pat on the 
shoulder is seen as good, or this also entails handshakes in the 


business world. 


Proxemics 


Proxemics refers to the distance between yourself and someone else—it is 
the usage of space between yourself and the world around you. Naturally, 
people put varying degrees of space between themselves and others, and 
when you are looking to understand proxemics, the best way to do so is to 
consider it a judgment of the relationship between yourself and those 
around you. You can also judge the relationships of others based upon the 


distance they put between each other, both vertical and horizontal. 
The use of vertical space 


Vertical space is exactly what it sounds like—it is the space relative to your 
own position height-wise. When someone is utilizing vertical space, they 
are attempting to make themselves taller or shorter, depending on the 
context. Those who want to make themselves taller may want to be seen as 
an authority or otherwise as someone that is deserving of respect and 
compliance. They may even use this space when they are trying to look at 
others who are taller than them—they simply tilt their heads back to look 


down their nose at the taller person to create the same impact. 


When you make yourself smaller, you typically want to be seen as less 
dominant for some reason. You may be attempting to shrink down to speak 
to a child in order to truly be understood, for example, or you may be 
lowering yourself to make yourself seem more submissive. In particular, 


people will pull their chins inward when they want to be seen as smaller 


because they will then be required to look up through their eyelashes at the 


other person, even if the other person is taller. 


The default, eye level, is deemed to be the most respectful—it marks you 
and the other person as equals deserving of the same respect and 


consideration. 


The use of horizontal space 


In horizontal space, you are looking at how near or far people are to each 
other. You will use this when you are picking apart the relationships of 
others. In particular, there are four distances that are used between each 


other, ranging from intimate distances all the way to the public distance. 


Intimate 
distance 


Personal 
distance 


Social 
distance 


Public 
distance 


y- 


e The intimate distance: This refers to being as close as possible 
to the other person. When you are in this position, you are usually 
touching without trying, or close enough to do so. This is 
typically for young children and parents, or for lovers that are 
comfortable being this close to each other. Generally speaking, 
this zone is only about 18 inches away from you. 

e The personal distance: Slightly further away than the intimate 
distance, the personal distance covers about 18 inches away up to 
about 5 feet around you. This is what people are talking about 


when they say that you are invading their personal bubbles. This 


zone is usually reserved for those that you like or feel 
comfortable with, such as friends and family members, or 
children that are too old to be within the intimate zone. The closer 
you can get to the center, the closer your relationship with that 
other person. 

The social distance: This is a bit further out. This is the distance 
that you naturally try to maintain with strangers around you, or 
when you are interacting with someone else that you do not know. 
Typically, this is between about 5 and 10 feet. You will use this 
when you are out and about unless you have no choice otherwise. 
When you are forced to encroach on this distance, most often, 
you will make it a point to ignore the other person in an attempt 
to ignore the fact that they are violating those personal 
boundaries, such as if you are sitting on the bus. 

The public distance: This is even further out—this refers to 
anything beyond about 12 feet and is reserved for instances in 
which you are speaking out toward a crowd. You want to be loud 
enough that everyone in the crowd can speak, so you want to 
ensure that people are a bit further away from you so they can see 


and hear you easier. This is reserved for lectures in classrooms, 


for example, or in performances. 


Chapter 5: Falsifying Body Language 


Of all the tools that you have at your discretion, none are as powerful as 
your ability to wield body language. Your body language is incredibly 
powerful, and because most people do not go through the effort of 
controlling their body language, people tend to take what they see or hear at 
face value. They are not even aware of the fact that their unconscious minds 
are processing over all of the body language you are exhibiting and 


responding accordingly. 


When you learn to finally take control of your body language, you will find 
that you are able to be far more effective in several contexts. You may be 
able to help yourself achieve the results you want. You may be able to 
persuade other people. You may be able to calm down other people or 
influence them to say yes. You will be able to figure out their mindset all 


because you are able to recognize and reflect body language back and forth. 


Within this chapter, we will discuss the power of body language in a bit 
more depth—you will begin to see how changing your own body language 
can influence how other people respond to you. You will be guided through 
several reasons why people choose to falsify their own body language from 
wanting to be able to negotiate well to wishing to calm down the other party 
or instill a sense of trust. You will be guided through the process of 
falsifying your own body language and how to get good at doing so, and 
lastly, how to identify when other people are falsifying their own body 


language. 


The Power of Body Language 


It has already been discussed and established thus far that body language is 
powerful and that people are always reading the body language of those 
around them. This is because the unconscious mind is always drawing 
inferences from body language on how best to interpret what is happening 
around them. However, body language is even more powerful than that. 
People can use body language to more or less control the minds of other 
people, and you can learn to do this, too. In particular, neuro-linguistic 
processing is one such example of this—in NLP, people are actively using 
their body language to establish a relationship with other people and 
influencing how they process and understand the world to see real changes 


in behaviors. 


Beyond that, body language is also useful in several other aspects as well. It 
can change the perception of other people toward you. It can be used to 
change your own behaviors and mindsets through changing your own body 
language, allowing your body to send feedback to your own brain. It can be 
used as a tool to relax during periods of anxiety. It can be used to establish 


and determine relationships with other people. 


Body language has the power to make you look like a criminal or as a 
confident, productive member of society without needing to change 
anything but your pose. You can be seen as a threat or as someone 
trustworthy, all based upon your pose, with everything else remaining the 
same. This is because your body language is incredibly powerful. Your 
body language is perhaps one of the most obvious forms of nonverbal 


communication, and it makes up a massive amount of your communication. 


You have already gone through the process of learning how to read body 
language, but now, it is time to look at how you can use body language to 
impact and sway those around you. Falsifying body language is not always 
a bad thing—when you do so, you can usually help your communication 
improve, as contradictory as it may sound. Sometimes, you need to change 


your body language just to communicate clearly. 


Why Falsify? 


If you knew that it was possible to feign body language on a regular basis, 
would you feel like those around you are less trustworthy? Now, it would 
certainly be possible for people around you to be problematically 
untrustworthy, but for the most part, body language is tweaked in ways that 
make people better leaders. Leaders, in particular, are well aware of the 
benefits of good body language, from power poses to simply positioning 


oneself in a specific way. 


When you falsify your body language, you usually have a good reason to do 
so. You may want to be seen as more confident or in control, such as at a 
job interview, in which you are hoping to get the job out of it. You may use 
it when interacting with your children if you are a parent. You may use it 
when confronted by someone to let them know that you are not willing to 


back down, no matter how you may truly be feeling internally. 


Effectively, there is no shortage of reasoning for falsifying language, and it 
is not particularly difficult if you know what you are doing. Likewise, 
falsifying your body language does not inherently make you manipulative 
or untrustworthy—in fact, the entire purpose of this chapter, at least in 
guiding you, will be to establish the ways that you should alter your natural 
body language in order to better communication between yourself and other 
people. Let’s spend some time going over several reasons in which you may 


intentionally alter your behavior. 


In negotiation 


If your career is based around negotiations, and you know that you need to 
be compelling and convincing in order to seal deals, you may find that the 
best way to do so is through making it a point to alter your behaviors. You 
will want to come across as confident but not cocky—you will want to 
make sure that you seem authoritative, but not authoritarian. When you are 
setting up to sit through negotiation, you want to make sure that you are 
seen in a light that is effective and trustworthy. You may choose to set up 
your chair to be in a position that is more likely to be seen as powerful, such 
as making sure your chair is slightly taller and sit with open, attentive body 
language, even if you are not particularly interested in whatever you are 
negotiating. Being able to alter your behaviors helps other people see you as 


effective at your job. 


In positions of power 


If you are a leader in any capacity, the last thing you want is to come across 
as weak and inefficient. For this reason, being able to alter your behavior 
just enough to ensure that you are seen as calm and in control can be 
incredibly beneficial to you. This is not a difficult process—all you will 
need to do is ensure that you are able to keep your body language confident 
and in control. For example, you may make it a point to stand tall with your 
hands behind your back while attentively watching other people as they 
speak. Think of the typical poses in which you see leaders in movies and 


emulate that. 


To calm people down 


If you have ever seen someone in crisis, you know that they are usually 
flighty and erratic—they are oftentimes panicking and far too stressed out 
to function effectively. However, you have a built in mechanism to help 
them settle. Your body language, when calm and in control, can help tell 
other people that everything is okay. You can change your body language to 
be calm, even when you know that you are stressed out about the situation. 
Think about how doctors and nurses can pull off that excellent bedside 
manner, even when in crisis, and they are able to reassure the patient that 
they will be okay, even when doubts may be filling the other person’s mind. 
When they are able to make sure that their body language is calm, they are 


able to better keep the patient calm, allowing them to do their job better. 


To communicate 


A massive amount of communication is done via nonverbal means. In fact, 
it is estimated that upwards of 55% of your communication is done via 
body language and other nonverbal means. This makes sense if you think 
about it—when you take away the body language, you start to see all sorts 
of new conflicts and misunderstandings. However, this means that 
sometimes, you are going to find that taking control of your body language 
and making it work for you instead of working for your body language is a 
necessity. If you want to communicate a message with someone, you are 
not going to want to do so with a scowl unless you are communicating your 
current displeasure, for example. Other times, you may find that what you 
want to communicate calls for a serious expression when you would rather 
laugh, such as when scolding a child. You are not sending the right message 


across to people if you laugh while scolding them. By ensuring that your 


body language always matches up with the message that you are trying to 


convey can help you avoid any unwanted mistakes. 


To understand 


Listening is one of those skills that people often struggle with. However, 
you can learn to master listening to understand through making sure that 
you assume the proper body language. Tuning your body into listening, by 
taking poses designed for active listening, can help you actively pay better 
attention. Your body will naturally settle into listening effectively, and all 
you need to do is make it a point to pay close attention to the other person 


with open postures. 


To influence others 


Similarly to the methods that have been discussed thus far, when you are 
trying to influence someone to do something, you want to make sure that 
your body language is trustworthy. You want the other person to feel 
compelled to help you, no matter what. This means that you need to ensure 
that you are able to present yourself as calm, friendly, and trustworthy in 


order to help. 


For example, imagine that you want to influence your children to clean up. 
Yelling at them is not going to work. Threatening them is not going to 
work. However, what is likely to work is telling them, very seriously, that if 
they do not pick up, that there will be consequences, such as their toys 
being broken because they will get stepped on when left on the floor, and 


you are far more likely to get results. 


To influence yourself 


Your body language is also incredibly effective at influencing yourself. 
Have you ever heard the expression, “Fake it until you make it”? This is the 
perfect example of that. Body language has been used to fight panic attacks 
—if your anxiety is running haywire, you can do something that you would 
never do during a truly panic-worthy emergency, such as chewing on gum 
to remind yourself to calm down because you would never be chewing on 
gum when in danger. Effectively, your mind begins to take feedback from 
your body and will then regulate accordingly. This means then that your 
body ends up regulating your mind. Your body language tells your mind to 


change its state. 


You can see this effect with several other forms of body language. You can 
try smiling more than usual in order to start motivating yourself to feel 
happier or more confident. You can stand in certain poses to encourage 
yourself to feel more confident, such as the power pose of standing with 


your hands on your hips, straight and tall, with your head raised. 


Effectively, then, using your body language is a fantastic way to 
communicate with your unconscious mind to regulate it. If you can master 
this, you can begin to utilize your own body language during your own 


emotional regulation. 


How to Control Your Body Language 


Controlling your body language does not have to be difficult. If you are 
ready to begin controlling your body language once and for all, all you need 
to do is develop the ability to be self-aware and self-regulate. These skills 
are two foundational skills in emotional intelligence, but they do play a part 
in attempting to change your own body language as well. In developing this 
ability, you will start to see all of the benefits that you can gain from having 
good body language. 


Become self-aware 


Perhaps the most important part of being able to control your own body 
language is to learn how to be self-aware. This means that you need to be 
able to stay in touch with your own emotions and learn how they directly 
impact your body language. You may notice that you have a tendency to get 
upset and then struggle with showing that you are open to further 
communication. You may find that you cannot possibly work through your 
anger when faced with it. No matter what your body language tends to skew 


toward, make it a point to figure out how best to understand it. 


Over time, you should start to pick up patterns. You will know that you take 
certain stances in certain moods and see how your stances seem to influence 
how you feel as well. In learning how this happens, you will be able to 
understand the patterns. Those patters will be your baseline, and you can 
use them in real-time. You will be able to cue into the fact that you are 
getting upset when you realize that you are clenching a fist. You will be 
able to tell that you are stressed out when you start biting your nail, and 


when you learn to recognize these signs, you start to identify the times in 


which you really need to change your body language in the first place, and 


you will be equipped to do so. 


Pay attention to how your body language impacts other people 


Upon studying your own body language, it is time to start watching how 
your body language seems to be impacting other people. You will now how 
your body language lines up with your own internal feelings, but you need 
to also see how it impacts others. Watch to see if people avoid you when 
you stand a certain way or if you seem particularly approachable in some 
situations. No matter what the situation and how you are seen, you will be 
gathering valuable feedback. 


This stage will require you to empathize. Empathy itself is your ability to 
understand the mindset of other people, and if you are able to do so, you 
will begin to get extra insight into how others view you. You will begin 
understanding those views so you can start to piece together which of your 
behaviors get what reaction. If you are influencing other people on a regular 
basis with your own body language, you need to understand how they see 


you. 


Learn to self-regulate 


When you are pretty confident that you understand how you are seen by 
others, you can start to self-regulate. This means that you can start 
experimenting with your own behaviors. Of course, the best way to truly 
alter your body language is going to be to develop the mindset that you are 


trying to exude. You will need to ensure that other people are seeing you the 


way that you want to be seen. Sometimes, that may be standoffish, such as 
if you want to be left alone and are walking through a crowded area. Other 
times, you may want to be open and approachable, such as at work or with 
your family. Experiment with your body language and watch how everyone 
around you responds. You may be surprised to notice that people will 


respond in ways that you did not necessarily expect them to. 


Focus on good body language cues 


Finally, when you are controlling your body language, you need to develop 
good body language cues. This one can take practice, as you will be 
developing several at once in order to really make sure that you can regulate 
effectively. You will want to know how to be a good listener, how to be 
seen as confident, and more. In spending the time to learn how to use your 
own body language to influence others, you will not only be able to regulate 
yourself but also your interactions. Some examples of good body language 
to develop include: 

e Howto make good eye contact 

e How to listen effectively 

e How to be seen as confident and open 

e How to be seen as approachable 
There are several other examples, as well. Please feel free to review 
Chapter 4: Reading Body Language to ensure that you are confident in how 


to be read by other people. 


Try not to fake your body language whenever possible 


When you are trying to come across a certain way, do your best to avoid 
lying about your body language. This means that when you are exuding a 
specific kind of body language, you should always be doing so in a way that 
is congruent with something that you are feeling. Your body will resist you 
when you fake your body language—for example, a falsified smile will not 
have the characteristic crinkle in the eye. By ensuring that you are always 
changing your body language to something that you are feeling, even if it is 
not your primary feeling, you can sort of bypass this. As you will see in the 


next section, you can identify falsified language relatively simply. 


Identifying Others Falsifying Their Body 
Language 


When you are ready to look at your body language next to other people, you 
may be surprised to see that some people’s body language may seem 
disjointed. They may seem dishonest somehow, and you may not be able to 
quite place your finger on it. When this happens, one of the best things to 
look for is whether the body language is being faked or not. This is a 
fantastic skill to have—you will be able to tell if the other party is showing 
you body language that is intentionally incongruent, or if there is something 
else going on. In particular, this section will provide you with several signs 


that the other party may have falsified language in some way. 
Look for microexpressions 


Microexpressions are the minute, nearly uncontrollable twitches and 
movements of the face that are made when you feel an emotion. Because 
your unconscious mind works automatically with no regard to the 
conscious, it will automatically try to shift your body language accordingly, 
and you will need to override it. When you override that language, 
oftentimes, you do not do so perfectly—some sort of microexpression 
remains. It could be a slight twitch of the lip, or it could be a twitch of the 
eye. No matter what the microexpression is, if you notice that the other 
person’s face seems entirely stoic after noticing a slight twitch somewhere, 
there is a good chance that someone is going to be feeling something that 


they do not want to let on. 


Look for signs of dishonesty or discomfort 


As you were shown in Chapter 4, there are several signs that people are 
uncomfortable with their situation and that betray lying. When you notice 
these, there is a good chance that something is being lied about and that 
something can always be body language. When trying to determine whether 
someone is showing the truthful body language, you may need to look for 


signs of dishonesty to ensure that they are, in fact, lying. 


Study eye contact 


Forced or falsified attempts to maintain eye contact when someone does not 
want to tend to come across as incredibly fake, and for good reason. 
Unnatural eye contact is usually uncomfortable for everyone involved, and 
it can be a sign of forcing eye contact in order to send a certain message. 
However, if you feel like the eye contact being maintained does not seem 
right or normal, you may want to reconsider whether the interaction is 


honest. 


Look for clusters of body language 


When people’s body language is uncensored, it typically appears in clusters. 
A smile will likely be joined by the facial expression and a relaxed or 
excited posture. Crying is likely to be joined with hunching over and 
crossing arms. Looking to make sure that the entire body seems to be 
sending the same message will help you understand if the message is faked 
or if only one or two aspects are being feigned. Sometimes, people will try 
to mimic body language, but forget a few critical parts, or they will have a 


sad face while their body language is standoffish or even confident and in 


control. When it is a cluster that is congruent, however, you can generally 


be sure it is truthful. 


Chapter 6: Detecting Lying 


Stop and think of the stereotypical 3-year-old child. You see that the child 
in front of you has chocolate around his mouth. You ask him if he took the 
cookies off of the counter, noting that two are missing. He looks up at you, 
grins, and shakes his head. Did he do it? 


There is a good chance that he did, especially since you caught him 
chocolate-mouthed right next to the missing chocolate cookies. Notice how 
he grinned up at you without any talk and ran away, cackling gleefully and 
thinking that he got away with it. 


Children start lying and experimenting with lying early on—it is not a sign 
that you are raising a child that will be dishonest or that your child is a bad 
seed—you simply have a young child that is experimenting with how best 
to interact with the world. Your three-year-old now recognizes that you are 


not omniscient and cannot see what is in his head, so he lies. 


Lying can be particularly problematic in the adult world when more is at 
stake than a couple of cookies and a hyper three-year-old; however—when 
you are interacting with the world around you and find that adults are lying 
to you, you can run into issues. You could potentially find yourself 
scammed or the victim of fraud if you cannot tell when people are honest or 
dishonest. Being able to identify deception and lies becomes critical in the 
adult world. 


Within this chapter, we will address lying and deception. You will be guided 


through several forms of deception, many of which people assume are not 


true lies, and how to recognize them. You will be provided with a list of 
criteria to double-check to determine when someone around you has been 
dishonest. You will also be guided through several reasons that people may 
choose to lie and be dishonest with others. Upon finishing reading this 
chapter, you should be able to recognize lies a little easier than you could 
before, and that skill alone can help you immensely in your interactions 


with the world. 


Deception 


Deception is not just an attempt to pass a lie as the truth—in fact, there are 
several other aspects as well. Deception is any attempt to mislead the truth 
in some way, whether verbally or in action. There are several different types 
of deception, but ultimately, all are designed to alter the truth in some way, 
shape, or form, whether by legitimately changing all details or by making it 
a point to avoid talking about something or skirting around a question 
because you feel like not answering honestly by not saying anything at all is 


not the same as deception. 


Unfortunately, deception runs rampant in the world, and it can seriously 
damage relationships between people. Regardless of whether the 
relationship is romantic or entirely professional, deception can cause 
serious mistrust and feelings of betrayal to arise. Where there is no trust, 
there may as well be no relationship, something that is incredibly 
unfortunate. This means that lying is perhaps one of the easiest ways to 


entirely decimate a relationship. 


Deception is actually so poorly received and violates so many social rules 
that it can actually be deemed grounds for civil litigation. It can even be 
prosecuted criminally if it slips into fraud. This means that dishonesty and 
deception are incredibly frowned upon and should be avoided as much as 


possible. 


Types of Deception 


Deception is so much more than simply lying about what is being said— 
there are several other aspects to the deception that are critical to 
understand as well. You can deceive without ever saying a word in some 
instances. Understanding these different types of deception can help you 
acknowledge and protect yourself from them in the future, as you will know 
what to look out for. There are primarily six different types of deception 
that will be discussed in this chapter. Take the time to familiarize yourself 
with each of these in order to ensure that you do not fall into the trap of 


using these forms of deception yourself. 


Untruth Understatement 


Concealment Exaggeration 


Concealments 


Concealing something is effectively finding a way to omit information that 
would be imperative to making a proper judgment. You may also behave in 
a way that is designed to hide the truth somehow, such as acting, to avoid 


mentioning the truth. When you are able to identify concealments, you can 
tell when people are intentionally avoiding the subject at hand for some 
reason, and that can be enough to cue you in to looking at how truthful they 


are being. 


For example, imagine that you left your child with a friend to babysit while 
you went out on a date with your spouse. When you get back, you find that 
your child has a big bruise on his face. You ask what the bruise is from, and 
your friend sort of shrugs and continues talking about something entirely 
unrelated or mentions something cute that your child has done in order to 
distract you. This was not to genuinely share what your child has done, but 
rather to make you distracted so you would not pay as close of attention to 


the bruise. 


Equivocations 


When you are using equivocations, you are making statements that are 
either indirect or ambiguous in order to skirt around the truth. You may say 
something that is not necessarily untrue, but you have avoided answering 


the true question at the heart of everything. 


For example, imagine that you asked your friend about the bruise on your 
child’s face. Instead of telling you how the child was bruised, you get some 
spiel about how children are clumsy, and accidents happen. Technically 
true, but that completely avoided the question at hand. You still do not 


know how your child got the bruise in the first place. 


Exaggerations 


When someone uses an exaggeration, they try to make things seem worse or 
bigger than they currently are. It is some sort of overstatement, taking the 
truth and stretching it out to be bigger and worse than it otherwise would 
have been. This is still a form of deception, though the truth is at the heart 
of what is being said, simply because the truth is not being reported as the 
whole truth. It is being manipulated and stretched into something entirely 


different than it originally was. 


For example, after you asked your friend what happened to your child’s 
face, you may have been told that your child had been running way too 
quickly without paying attention and slammed into a wall, and it was 
entirely accidental. Your friend says that your child should have been 
paying attention. You stop and consider the veracity of this and come to the 
conclusion that she is lying because your child is not yet running—perhaps 


the child has just learned how to unsteadily toddle around. 


Lies 


Lies are simply making up information that is entirely unrelated or 
inaccurate to the truth. This could be saying something that has no grounds 
in the truth or saying something that is the opposite of what is actually true. 
When you are told a lie, there is no truth in the statement at all. It is meant 
to be as far away from the truth as possible, likely to disguise the real truth 


that could likely be construed as worse than the lie. 


For example, when you ask about the bruise on the child’s face, your friend 


may respond that he already had the bruise when he was dropped off and 


completely refuse to answer anything other than that. You are left trying to 
figure out whether or not that is the truth and wondering if the child was 


actually bruised when dropped off. 


Understatements 


Understatements are the opposite of exaggerations—when someone makes 
an understatement, they are downplaying the truth to some degree. They 
may feel like telling the truth will be far worse than understating it, so they 
opt to make it seem like less of a big deal than it was initially assumed to 
be. This is still dangerous as it makes a potentially serious issue miss 


whatever attention it may have needed. 


For example, your friend tells you that your child simply bumped his head 
when he slipped while trying to walk. What she did not tell you was that he 
hit his head really hard, cried for 20 minutes, and vomited shortly after, and 
has been acting lethargic since. In that instance, your child likely needed 
medical treatment, and yet your friend made it sound like it was no big deal, 


so you would not blame her for not supervising the child closely enough. 


Untruth 


Finally, we arise at the untruth—this is when people say things that are 
taking and misinterpreting the truth into something different. It is entirely 
meant to misinterpret things in order to distract from the actual truth and 
should be treated with extreme caution. When you are dealing with 


someone being untruthful, you may find that the other person is likely to 


completely sidestep any truthfully problematic aspects and misinterpret 


what has happened into something else. 


For example, when you ask what happened to your child, your friend says 
that he hit his head. What she does not tell you was that she had actually 
dropped the child because she was not paying attention to what she was 
doing as she walked through her home, and she did not expect the child to 
flail. She sort of told the truth, but put another spin on things. 


Signs of Deception 


If you are not well-trained, you may find that spotting deception is actually 
surprisingly difficult. When you know what to look for, however, it 
becomes infinitely simpler. Deception has a handful of signs that make it 
incredibly obvious, even when not paying attention to body language, such 
as: 


e Vagueness: When someone is vague with the details and seems 
to resist providing any specific details, they may be trying to hide 
their lie altogether. 

e Repetition: When what someone says becomes repetitive or goes 
in circles, they may be lying and trying to convince themselves of 
whatever they are saying because they are lying. 

e Speaking in fragments: When the other person does not speak in 
full sentences and instead answers in short statements such as, 
“No, not that,” or “Yes, to the store,” you may be dealing with 


someone who is lying. 


Not giving specific details when asked or challenged: If, when 
asked directly, the other party still cannot give specific details, it 
is quite possible that they are actively lying to you or about 
something, which is incredibly problematic if you need the truth. 

Nervous behavior: If the other person seems uncharacteristically 
nervous, they may be lying, especially if the situation is not one 
that would usually warrant any sort of nervousness or discomfort. 
If the other party is quite familiar in that environment but is 
repeatedly appearing to be nervous, you may want to analyze 


their honesty. 


Identifying Deception 

Just knowing the signs is not always enough. Sometimes, it helps to have a 
sort of checklist to go through in your mind when you are trying to 
determine whether someone is actively lying to you or not. By 
understanding whether or not the other party is lying or being deceptive, 
you can begin to figure out how much you want to trust them. There are 
primarily four ways that you can identify whether or not you feel like 
someone is deceptive: 

e Look at more than just body language: Listen to the voice for a 
while—does it sound nervous or like someone who is lying? Pay 
attention to the words being used and whether you can identify 
any of the signs of deception. 

e Focus on deceptive body language: When you do look at body 
language, however, look specifically for the body language that is 
traditionally clustered as deception. 

e Ask for the story to be told in reverse: If someone has provided 
you with a long, drawn-out tale that you are doubting, one way to 
figure out if it is true or not is to ask them to tell you what 
happened, but backward this time. If they have to think too hard 
about it, you have a pretty good indicator that they are making 
things up. 

e Trust your gut: Finally, when you are attempting to identify 
whether or not someone is deceptive, trust your gut instincts. 
Those instincts are there for a reason, and it is entirely possible 
that your unconscious mind has picked up on cues that you are 


missing as you go through the interaction. 


Why Deception is Used 


When people do decide to lie or be deceptive, they usually have some sort 
of reason. Of course, some will do so just for fun to see if they can do it, 
and others may do it in an attempt to be polite, such as saying they like 
something that they did not actually care for. No matter the reason, 
however, deception is usually recommended to be avoided. After all, even if 
you are actively lying to maintain a relationship, you may run into problems 


later on if the deception is ever discovered. 
Instrumentally 


When used instrumentally, deception is designed to be used as a tool. It may 
be done as an attempt to avoid punishment, for example, such as trying to 
lie about doing something in order to escape blame or to establish an alibi 
that does not actually exist. It could be used to protect resources, such as 
telling someone that is asking for money that you do not have any on you 
and, therefore, cannot help them with whatever it was that you were asked 
about. These are basically wielding deception as a tool of sorts to avoid 


something. 
Relationally 


When you use deception relationally, it is meant to maintain a relationship. 
This would be the idea of telling someone that no, that dress does not make 
their butt look big while leaving out the obvious truth—their butt is what 
makes their butt look big, not the dress. Relational deception is effectively 
to protect the feelings of other people in a way that makes sure that they are 


happy, even though they are still being lied to. 


With unimportant lies, such as how big that dress made someone’s butt 
look, they are usually relatively harmless. However, sometimes there are 
larger lies as well, such as insisting that someone not related biologically at 
all is a child’s true father, despite not sharing that genetic contribution. 
While that person may, for all intents and purposes, be a dad to the kid, 
there is still an important factor to consider that oftentimes, people want to 
know where they came from. Larger relational lies, such as telling someone 
their father is one person when, in fact, it is someone else can generally be 


quite harmful. 


To preserve identity 


Finally, people often use deception when they need to protect their self- 
image. They will use this form of lying to ensure that they are protected 
from the truth somehow, and they want to ensure that they look better than 
they actually are. For example, if someone has a criminal record and 
therefore is disqualified from a job that someone has been pushing for him 
to apply to, he may say that he applied and was not called back, or that he 
simply is not interested due to needing the background check, which the 


friend likely does not know about. 


Chapter 7: Dark Psychology 


Now, with all of that background information taken care of, it is time to 
delve into the world of dark psychology. This will take you into the minds 
of predators, whose prey of choice is often their own peers—those who 
wield dark psychology without any formal training tend to err toward being 
abusive or controlling of other people, using the manipulation to their 


advantage with no regards for the other party. 


When you are looking at dark psychology, you are considering how these 
predators in human skin choose to wield their weapons, looking at how they 


like to choose their targets and figuring out how best to think like they do. 


This chapter will guide you through the process of learning how to identify 
dark psychology users, as well as how to start thinking with dark 
psychology. You will be introduced to the concept of dark psychology with 
a brief explanation of what it is. You will be walked through the Dark Triad 
—the personalities that tend to wield dark psychology. Lastly, you will be 
guided through the reasons why someone may use dark psychology in the 


first place. 


What is Dark Psychology? 


Dark psychology itself is the study of how people with the dark triad 
personality types tend to interact with the world around them. It looks 
specifically at how those particular people view people, how they choose to 
manipulate those people, and how they choose to interact with people. The 
usage of dark psychology is often considered quite controversial simply 
because of the distress that it can cause the other party. Because so many of 
the dark psychology users are prone to manipulation and the use of people 
without concern for how they may hurt others, dark psychology itself has 
developed the bad rap of being entirely negative simply because it looks at 


those same techniques. 


However, it is important to note that dark psychology is little more than just 
another viewpoint to interact with the world. It is not inherently evil or 
wrong—it simply is what it is. It is a toolset—it is techniques that could be 
wielded in ways that are harmful, but even your dinner fork could be used 
as a weapon if the person holding it truly wanted to hurt someone else. You 
cannot simply disregard dark psychology altogether simply because some 


people have chosen to use it negatively or as a weapon. 


The next several chapters will guide you through dark psychology and the 
dark psychology mindset. You will be shown how to think about the world 
as if you were in the mind of a predator. You will be shown a glimpse into 
the darkness that fills their mind, but unlike those with the dark triad 
personality types, you do not have to give in to the temptation—you can 
simply learn how dark psychology works without ever deciding to act upon 
it. 

Dark psychology looks at influence and persuasion. It looks at using NLP to 
control other people. It seeks to get what the users want at all costs. 
However, what if someone with no interest in manipulation were to wield 
this tool? What if they were to use dark psychology in ways that were not 
met to hurt, but rather were designed to help people break free of anything 
that is holding them down. Maybe you use it to convince someone that they 
must break up with their abusive partner. Maybe a doctor uses it to 
encourage someone to seek proper treatment for a tumor that will be fatal if 
they do not operate soon. Maybe you use it during negotiations and 
consequently get a promotion because your numbers have been so good. 
Ultimately, dark psychology does not have to be evil or wrong—it can 


simply be neutral until someone decides to pick up the tool and use it. 


The Dark Triad 


The dark triad refers to a very specific set of personality traits: Narcissism, 
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. Each of these traits can be incredibly 
detrimental to one’s ability to relate to a socially meaningful level simply 
because of the implications that come with each of those personality types. 
These personality types are referred to as dark just because they have a 
tendency to be malevolent. Each of these types of people struggle in their 
daily interactions with others and are at an increased risk of being 
antisocial, as well as being more likely to commit crimes. These people 
usually struggle with empathy and generally are quite negative and 


disagreeable. 


Machiavellian 


Narcissism 


The narcissist is someone suffering from narcissistic personality disorder. 
This is a person who is entirely consumed by grandiosity and egotism, and 
his lack of empathy makes it impossible to really relate with other people as 
well. The narcissist believes that he is the greatest person in the world, and 
is usually quite entitled and dominant, though that entitlement and 


dominance is never truly earned in the way that most people would earn it. 
Machiavellianism 


Machiavellian personality types typically are quite cynical, but only in the 
sense that they must protect themselves at all costs rather than looking at 
the world through a skeptical lens. These people typically feel like they 
must manipulate other people if they want to possibly succeed .Usually, 
these people struggle with agreeableness and conscientiousness, and 
oftentimes, those who rank highly in Machiavellianism also tend to score 
highly in psychopathy as well. 

Psychopathy 


Finally, the last of the three dark triad personality types is psychopathy. This 
is usually considered to be the most malignant of the three, with the 
psychopath showing to struggle with empathy while also showing that they 


have a high level of impulsivity and seeking out thrills in any way possible. 


Why Use Dark Psychology? 


Ultimately, there are several reasons that one may use dark psychology, and 
not all are as bad as one may think. Several people in society use these 
techniques not to hurt others but to make sure that they are able to get 
results that are needed. Politicians and leaders may wield the tools of 
influence and persuasion to keep people motivated. Public speakers may 
mess with the mood in the room to convey a certain message. Police 
officers may use it to get people to stay in line. No matter who is using it, 
there is generally some sort of purpose, even if sometimes, that purpose 
turns out to be simply for entertainment. Now, let’s go over a list of several 
ordinary usages of dark psychology that you have most likely encountered 


recently. 
Attorneys 


Attorneys will often use dark psychology techniques when desperate for a 
win. They may get so caught up in wanting to make sure that they get a 
positive result for themselves, and for their record that they will use 


manipulation or dark persuasion in order to guarantee that end result. 
Leaders and managers 

People in any sort of leadership position sometimes use dark methods to 
keep people in line. They do not care about ensuring that their image is 
good—they simply want the results, which involves complete compliance, 


no matter how it may have been attained. 


Politicians 


Similar to the attorneys, politicians may use techniques that are dark in 
order to convince others to side with them. They may appeal to emotions or 
try to completely sidestep any sort of honest attempts to present facts in 
favor of those that will stir up emotions and rile up crowds. Those 
politicians that only care about the vote are likely to use any means possible 


to get them. 


Public speakers or activists 


Sometimes, public speakers will intentionally mess with the emotional state 
in the room in order to see better results. They will intentionally tell people 
sad stories, knowing they are more likely to donate if they are already 
feeling guilty over having seen, for example, a bunch of pictures of children 


starving in Africa. 


Sales 


Salespeople are oftentimes entirely reliant on the commissions that they 
will get through their ability to actually close sales. They become so 
determined to sell more in order to keep their job or just to pay their bills 
that they may begin to use dark psychology tendencies to get what they 
want or need. For example, they may intentionally use neuro-linguistic 
programming or dark persuasion techniques in order to get the other party 


to agree sooner rather than later. 


Chapter 8: Dark Psychology and 
the Mind 


Dark psychology is so insidious because it targets the unconscious minds of 
others, attempting to infiltrate and control the other person completely. 
There are techniques that involve completely decimating the previous 
personality that resided within someone’s mind and changing it up, 
grooming the individual to follow along with whatever the dark psychology 
user wanted. Other techniques may attempt to completely erase the person 
that was there through brainwashing, destroying the person, and creating a 


new persona for them instead. 


Of course, not all of dark psychology is interested in creating new 
personalities with perfect obedience—several are involved in simply 
swaying people to do something for them. Nevertheless, all forms of dark 
psychology have the potential to be dangerous. When used dangerously or 
in ways that are intentionally dark, they can cause some serious problems 


from the victim. 


This chapter seeks to identify and understand exactly how it is that dark 
psychology directly interacts with the mind, as well as to provide a few 
examples for you to see this process in action. In understanding how the 
mind is infiltrated and just how deep-reaching dark psychology can be, you 
may find that you think twice about utilizing it within your life or toward 


people that you know and like. 


How Dark Psychology Works 


Ultimately, dark psychology works quite similarly to manipulation—you 
must be willing to first and foremost target someone else without qualms. 
When you have decided upon a target, you must also be able to direct your 
efforts in a way that remains covert, allowing the entire process to seem 
quite relaxed or natural. When you are playing the dark psychology game, 
you are playing the long game, and it is not unusual for people who are 
using dark psychology to spend months, or even years, setting up for their 
next victim. They want to be able to get the exact results that they want or 
need without worrying about detection, and that means spending enough 


time to build everything up over time. 


Most of the time, people will go out of their way to befriend the victim. 
Befriending the victim means that the manipulator can spend the time 
necessary to begin scoping out the victim to ensure that they are, in fact, the 
right person for the job and for what is wanted. From there, the manipulator 
spends plenty of time getting to know the victim. After all, the best person 
to manipulate someone is someone who is trusted. As soon as the individual 
is able to secure a place in the victim’s friend group, they soon are deemed 
trustworthy. With friendship established, the manipulator is free to begin 


reconnaissance. 


During this point in time, the manipulator cares about getting data that can 
be sued later. They want to know why you want things a certain way. They 
want to know what makes you tick and why you plan your life the way you 


have planned it. The more information they know about you, the more 


likely it is that you have given him or her some sort of important snippet 


that can be used somehow. 


With the understanding of what makes the victim tick, the manipulator 
begins the manipulation process—slowly at first and then slowly picking up 
the pace until the victim is entirely entrenched with the manipulator. The 
manipulator will be able to then begin to plant ideas and thoughts into the 
victim’s mind through techniques such as repetition until the ideas become 
absorbed and the victim, completely unaware, believes that the ideas were 


his or hers, to begin with. 


Over time, the manipulator is able to install all of the strings that are desired 
in the victim, as being in a position of trust means that very little will 
actually be questioned as it occurs. Because of the position of trust, the 
victim will simply accept what is being said at face value without worrying 


about analyzing each and every statement for veracity. 


In the end, the strings are installed, and the manipulator is free to continue 
on as if nothing ever happened, pulling on strings whenever it is necessary 


to get what they want done when they want it done. 


This primarily works because the individual being manipulated does not 
realize that they are. There are times during which the individual being 
manipulated is aware of the coercion, such as during brainwashing, but for 
the most part, the best way to make sure that you can successfully 
manipulate other people is through ensuring that they never know what you 
are doing it. When you are able to make sure that the victim is in the dark, 


they are far more susceptible. 


The unconscious mind is surprisingly unprotected, and that is exactly what 
you target with this process. Thoughts are internalized. Patterns are built up. 
Ultimately, the individual begins to change over time without realizing that 
it is happening until suddenly, they cannot figure out how they changed or 
why. They never think to point the finger at the manipulator either because 


they feel like they could trust them. 


Example 1: Mind Control with Dark Psychology 


Imagine that you know this woman that you really want to get involved 
with romantically. However, you feel like sometimes, she can be a bit 
obnoxious or annoying, and you wish she would tone things down a few 
notches. You decide that you will pursue it, but you want to also make sure 
that she tones things down, and you set up an action plan for yourself to 
essentially manipulate her into quieting down and being a bit more 


subservient. 


You start by getting to know her a bit better—you make sure you are the 
picture-perfect date and give her everything she wants. You lavish her with 
gifts and make sure that she always feels listened to. You are listening—but 
you are only listening because you need weapons to use against her in the 
future. Perhaps she mentions that she had a poor upbringing and is not in 


contact with any family any longer. She has a few friends, but most of her 


time is simply spent between work and home, where she lives with her cat. 


You do not really like cats much but are willing to tolerate it. 


Over time, you earn her trust, and occasionally, you mention how annoying 
it is to be dealing with people that are louder than they need to be. You say 
that you find women that have to get the last word to be shrill and 


obnoxious. She seems mildly put off by this, but nothing happens. 


After a few weeks, you notice that she seems to be quieting down a bit. You 
can’t tell if she is simply stressed out as she has been working a lot, or if she 
is beginning to internalize what you have said. When she is quiet, you 
praise her, telling her you love how attractive and gentle she is, and that she 
is the perfect picture of femininity. When she is too loud for your liking, 


you frown, but do not say a word. 


Eventually, she is simply quieter. She does not seem interested in rocking 
the boat, and she does not mention anything being wrong either. You 
effectively convinced her to quiet down simply through the use of your own 
words to infiltrate her mind and install those thoughts of insecurity 


surrounding the idea of being loud. 


Example 2: Sales with Dark Persuasion 


Imagine that you sell cars for a living. You like your job well enough—you 
are good at it and tend to land sales pretty regularly. However, you have 
been studying recently and found out that if you were to use your own 
methods of convincing the other party that you know best, you would have 
a pretty good chance at ensuring that they are more likely to buy what you 
are suggesting. All you need to do is establish yourself as an expert and 
drop some hints down about how other people in their position bought the 
car that you are attempting to sell them versus the car that they are 


interested in. 


You go in one day and see that you have an appointment that afternoon with 
someone who is interested in buying a new car. They specified that they 
really wanted an older minivan in the message they left on your machine. 
You keep that in mind, but looking at the price, you realize that it would not 
net you a very nice commission bonus, and you decide that is the perfect 
attempt to use your dark persuasion techniques that you have read about 


recently. 


They come in, and you immediately greet them. You make mention of the 
fact that you have been selling cars for the last decade and that you have 
had the very same van that they are interested in, but you hated it. You line 
out several issues that you claim that you have had and then gently redirect 
them toward a newer, and consequentially, more expensive SUV. It still has 


the same number of seats, but the newer car has more features and is nicer. 


They seem to resist the suggestion, but after a few attempts and telling them 
that you got into a car accident in that car and the airbag malfunctioned, as 
well as several other comments meant to make them feel unsafe in the van, 
they finally relent, though you can see that they are visibly uncomfortable 


with the amount of money they will be financing. 


Ultimately, you got what you wanted—they took the car because they 
eventually relented to your authority on the subject. However, in forcing the 
point, they do not seem particularly confident in you as a salesperson, and 
you are not likely to get another sale from them in the future, nor are you 
likely to get good reviews. The good news, however, is that you got the 


bonus that you wanted. 


Example 3: Emotional Manipulation with Dark 
Psychology 


Now, imagine that you have decided that you are going to be giving a 
speech at a fundraiser. You really need to make enough money to cover the 
cost of the fundraiser, and then funds to also give to the cause as well. You 
know this, and you realize that the amount of money that you needed is 
actually far higher than it otherwise would have been had you chosen to do 


something simpler. 


The cause you are raising money for is to help provide food and shelter to 
victims of domestic violence and their young children for the holidays. You 
went all out because you wanted to create a nice Christmas party, but now 
you realize that the bar has been set far higher. You need to make even more 
money. Thinking about it, you realize that the best way to get the money is 


to really appeal to emotions. 


When you push an appeal to emotion, you will effectively be guilting the 
people out of their money, making them feel like they are lucky to not be in 
a situation rife with violence and instability. When it comes time for the 
fundraiser, you lay on the guilt, bringing out stories of people fleeing 
domestic violence and how they often leave with no money or belongings 


beyond the clothing on their backs. 


You really lay on the guilt, and eventually, you do happen to meet your 
quota that you needed, all by telling sob stories and over-exaggerating about 
the people you have been helping recently. Sure, some people do have it as 


bad as you have spoken about, but not most of the ones that you have 


helped as of late. Nevertheless, the end result is perfect for you—you 


succeeded, and everything balanced out. 


Chapter 9: Analyzing Body Language with Dark 
Psychology 


Dark psychology, considering just how concerned it is with infiltrating the 
unconscious mind, is also incredibly concerned with making sure that it can 
analyze any body language that it is exposed to. When you are interacting 
with someone else, you are effectively constantly taking feedback from 


their body language. 


Dark psychology users are no exception to this rule, either. They are also 
constantly getting that same feedback, but unlike the ordinary people that 
are uninterested in analysis, they are actively analyzing. They are aware of 
the movements, of the body language and what it means, and how their own 
body language is being reciprocated. They use their knowledge of body 
language and how it works in order to glean as much information as they 
possibly can in order to be certain that they are able to successfully 


manipulate. 


Within this chapter, you will delve into what it means to use dark 
psychology to analyze body language. You will also delve into how those 
users of dark psychology are likely to use their own body language to 
influence other people. You will see how people can use mirroring to 
effectively hijack the other person and make themselves more trustworthy. 
You will see how you can use body language to alter the impression that 
other people are developing about you. You will see how those who 
understand dark psychology will use their skills to both learn about other 


people and to influence them as well. 


Analysis with Dark Psychology 


When you analyze body language with dark psychology, you are doing so 
in order to understand vulnerabilities. You will make it a point to look for 
signs that the other person is uncomfortable or afraid of interacting further. 
You want the other person to be just unsettled enough to be easily 
controlled. You want them to be on edge because then they will be far more 


likely to be agreeable in the first place. 


Ultimately, people who feel like they are uncomfortable or unsettled, or like 
they are at a disadvantage tend to be more agreeable. They are easier to 
convince for one specific reason—their minds are so busy figuring out how 
best to keep themselves safe and end that discomfort that they are too 
preoccupied to truly defend themselves from the manipulation attempts. 
This means that with their minds busy and them feeling off-balanced, they 


can be controlled with ease. 


The dark psychology user is going to know this, and they will look for signs 
that the other person is uncomfortable, so they know that they can lash out. 
They will see that the other person is likely to be more susceptible and 
strike right then. Remember, the dark psychology user, when they are truly 
trying to manipulate someone else, are acting as predators. They will 
intentionally lash out and hurt other people whenever they can if it means 
that they will get their way and they have no qualms about it. They do not 
care that they are taking advantage of other people, so long as they get what 


they want in the end. 


In particular, when they are finally able to get a read on someone else, dark 
psychology users tend to use other techniques as well. They may mirror in 


order to create the impression of a good relationship between themselves 


and their target far quicker than before. They may use their body language 
to create anchor points—a technique that is specific to neuro-linguistic 
programming but oftentimes taken in by dark psychology users. They will 
watch as they can trigger people to say yes simply by inclining their heads. 
They will see exactly how all of this comes together to make them far more 
likely to actually persuade someone than they thought that they could ever 
be. 


The dark psychology users are skilled when it comes to understanding 
people, and whether they have developed this skill innately and naturally 
picked up on the most obvious cues, or because they have intentionally 
taught themselves how to read other people, they use this skill to their 


advantage. 


Mirroring 


One of the more popular techniques that can be used for influence is 
mirroring. This is another NLP skill that often gets utilized because it works 
upon the idea that people who trust each other tend to mirror each other’s 
behaviors and movements back and forth. For example, if you see a 
husband and wife sitting across from each other to eat dinner, you will 
probably notice that one of them is probably constantly shifting their 
movements to match the other. When the wife takes a drink, the husband 
takes a drink a few seconds later. When one shifts to the left, the other shifts 
to mirror them. When one takes a bite, the other takes a bite, and so on. 
This is because they have a close relationship—spouses are incredibly close 
when their relationship is a healthy one. 


Mirroring does not require that level of intimacy to occur, however. It can 
occur far sooner when the beginning of the relationship is sparked. Two 
people who are actively interested in each other and who have some degree 
of trust in one another are likely to be mirroring each other, even if their 


acquaintanceship is still quite new. All that matters is that they believe that 


the other person is not going to hurt them and that they are on the same 


page with everything that they have discussed and decided upon thus far. 


This means, then, that people will naturally mirror people as their 
relationship builds. However, people also have a tendency to reciprocate 
their own behaviors back and forth. If one person gives a gift, the other 
person feels obligated to do the same (this is known as the principle of 
reciprocity). You can sort of trigger this sense of reciprocity in someone 


else as well simply by starting the mirroring process artificially. 


If you can effectively mirror the other person, you can usually get them to 
mirror you back, and as soon as that mirroring relationship is built up, you 
have that access to the other person’s unconscious mind that you were 


seeking to get. This means that when you move, they move. 


Now, consider for a moment what that would imply—if you can effectively 
trigger your mind to behave or feel a certain way just because you had 
moved like you feel that way, such as smiling to make you feel better, even 
when you were actually quite sad, you can then get the other person to 
move with you. You can convince them to do things simply because they 
are locked into your own body language. Unconsciously, they are following 
your lead, so if you wanted to nod your head while asking a question, you 
would make them feel more likely or inclined to nod their head as well. You 
would effectively take over their mind for them and allow you to make all 


of the decisions yourself. 


Of course, all of this depends upon you learning to mirror the other person. 
Thankfully, mirroring is not particularly difficult—you can learn to mirror 
someone else with relative ease, so long as you know what you are doing. 
Remember, doing this is sort of creating an artificial bond between yourself 


and the other person—it is not quite the same as developing that rapport 


naturally and incrementally in the way that it would normally be built. 
Instead, it is designed to be far quicker. The other person will never be able 
to tell the difference, though! In fact, they will likely be entirely unaware of 
it happening unless they were also trained in dark psychology or NLP. 

There are four easy steps when you want to mirror someone: You will first 
trigger a connection between yourself and the other person. Then, you will 
spend the time to match their speech patterns. Thirdly, you will attempt to 
identify what is known as the other person’s punctuator. And finally, you 


will test to make sure that the relationship has been triggered. 


Create the connection 


Match vocal cues 


Identify and use the punctuator 


Test the connection 


Creating the connection 


Before you are able to begin mirroring, you must first make sure that you 
can trigger a connection between yourself and the other person. This is not 
too difficult—in fact, this can be broken down into four simple steps as 
well, and if you follow these steps, you will find that you are actually quite 
likely to get exactly what you were looking for. 


1. Front the person: This is a fancy way to say that you are facing 
the other person. You will make sure that you are making eye 
contact and looking them over directly. In doing so, you show 


them that you are giving them your utter attention. 


2. Triple nod: With eye contact made and while you listen to the 


other party speak, make it a point to nod occasionally. In 


particular, you want to do a triple nod every now and then. Three 
nods are critical to this, as the first nod says that you are listening, 
the second nod says you understand, and the third nod says that 
you also agree. People like people that agree with them, so doing 


this makes them feel more inclined to follow your lead. 


3. Fake it: Yes, faking it until you make it comes back again. This 
time, however, you must convince yourself that you are talking to 
someone you genuinely enjoy. You can do this in several ways. 
For example, you could tell yourself that you are utterly 
fascinated with the current topic of conversation and make sure 
that you truly believe it. Stop pretending and simply feel like you 
are enjoying the other person. You are basically triggering the 


connection that you wish to feel with the other person. 
Mimicking the speech patterns 


Next, you are responsible for figuring out how to match the other person’s 
speech. This is not particularly difficult—you simply have to adjust your 
own tone and manner of speaking to line up with the way that the other 
party is speaking, as well. You will do this by ensuring that your pitch and 
volume are quite similar. If the other person speaks slowly, deliberately, and 
quietly as they contemplate what they are talking about, make sure that you 
match this. If they are animated and excited, you should mimic that. This 
will key into their unconscious mind that you are in agreement and 
interested in them, allowing for the connection to be fostered just a bit 


easier. 
Finding the punctuator 


This sounds complicated, but all you are looking for is the motion, gesture, 


or phrase that the other person uses as their way to accentuate what is being 


said. If they, for example, punch the air when they get excited, you should 
make it a point to do so the next time that you feel like the other person is 
getting ready to punch. This can be a bit tough to get just right, and if you 
mess it up, you risk damaging your connection, but once you have 
identified their punctuator, all you need to do is figure out the patterns. Do 
they pump the air in excitement? Is it only when they say something that 
defeats an argument? What is the reason they choose to do so? Mimic that 
and use it to your advantage. They will likely not notice consciously that 
you are mimicking them, but their unconscious mind will latch on to feeling 


like you truly understand them and set the stage. 
Testing the mirroring 


Now is the time to find out if your work actually was effective. At this 
point, you will find out whether or not you actually did successfully 
convince the other person to actively start mirroring you. All you will need 
to do here is try some subtle motion that you do not think would be 
coincidental if it were copied. For example, brush off your shoulder and see 
if the other person does as well. You could also take a sip and watch, or tilt 
your head slightly to one side. If the other person mimics you, then you 
have been successful. If not, however, you will need to make sure that you 
go through the effort to get them acting accordingly. You will have to start 


the mirroring process all over again and test again afterward. 


Understanding and Analyzing Body Language for 


Influence 


Along with being able to mirror, the dark psychology user is also able to 
understand the nuances in body language that are seen. They are able to 
recognize when the grimace on someone’s face is out of fear or anger. They 
will be able to tell when a smile is fake versus when it was genuine. They 
will know all of the important signs and clusters to look out for in order to 
ensure that they can always take advantage of them whenever necessary. 
Effectively, they are able to put together a proper understanding of their 


reading and take advantage of it. 


The particularly skilled user, however, is also able to make inferences and 
figure out the perfect way to act in order to start to influence the other party. 
Mirroring is just one such form—you can use mirroring to influence, such 
as getting someone to trust you or feel like you have a closer relationship 
than you truly do. However, there is more than can be used. In particular, 
those who use the dark psychology techniques that have been introduced 
are also able to constantly influence how they are seen. They know how to 
be seen as dominant in the workplace or in a relationship, and they will do 
so. They know exactly what to do with their body language to be seen as a 
threat if they want or need to. They know how to assert their own 
dominance, or how to tell who in the room currently has that dominance or 
is the most well-liked individual, and if it is not the dark psychology user, it 


will likely be their next goal to become that individual. 


In particular, dark psychology users favor the shows of dominance. They 
allow them to assert themselves with very little effort—all they need to do 
is position themselves just a bit higher up on their office chair than the other 


person and they are automatically deemed to be more threatening or more 


dominant, even if they are talking to a peer in their office at the same table. 


This section will provide you with a handful of methods that are often used 


to establish dominance by the dark psychology user after analyzing and 


reading body language. 


Adjusting the chairs: The dominant person’s chair should be 
elevated just slightly compared to the chair of whoever is sitting 
at their desk. This will give the illusion of the dominant person 
being larger and therefore being the one that has dominance in the 


situation, regardless of whether that is true or not. 


Looking for dominance: When in a crowd of people, you can 
tell who has the dominance with a simple check. All you need to 
do is see the direction that everyone is orienting themselves. If 
they are all leaning toward one person, no matter the side they are 
sitting, you can figure out who the dominant individual is. You 
may also notice that feet will point toward the dominant or most 


desirable person in a room or crowd, as well. 


Sitting with the feet propped on the desk: This is a position of 
comfort at home, but in the office, it is commonly seen as a 
position of power. Not just anyone is comfortable enough at work 
to sit, sprawled out, with their legs propped up on the desk. After 
all, the desk is company property, and you are now sitting there 


with your dirty shoes on it. That takes guts or dominance. 


Looking down at people: When you are dominant over other 
people, you will most often look down at them. You may not 
actually be taller than the other person, but that is okay—your 
stare can be just as intimidating if you want it to be. All you need 
to do is tilt your head back just slightly and make sure that you 


look down your nose at the other party. In doing so, you are 


effectively telling the other person that they are not important 
enough to you to be treated as an equal with straight, eye-level 
eye contact. 


Staring: A solid stare can also be an effective way to actively 
encourage and enforce your own dominance toward other people, 
especially if the people around you tend to be a bit more 
submissive. The constant eye contact can be deemed too 


intimidating to maintain, and they will effectively give in. 


Chapter 10: Dark Psychology ’ s Effects 


Finally, you have arrived at the last chapter of How to Analyze People with 
Dark Psychology. This is where your journey of learning begins to wrap to 
a close. Nevertheless, it is critical for you to learn just a bit more about dark 
psychology and its effects before you move on. Remember, dark 
psychology is a potent tool that can be used to gain plenty of insight and 
intelligence, but at the same time, it can also be seen as a sort of weapon. 
People who do not know what they are doing may struggle to actively 
ensure that they avoid hurting other people, and unfortunately, when you 
are poking around in someone’s mind, the damage that you can potentially 
do can be irrevocable in some situations, such as if you have inflicted some 


sort of trauma in your manipulation attempts. 


Dark psychology may be designed to be a study and mimicry of those with 
the dark triad’s most potent methods of manipulation, but that does not 
mean that the act of interacting with other people must be harmful or 
detrimental to anyone involved. On the contrary, you can use these 
techniques and your powers in ways that are ethical. You can choose to 
wield your tools in ways that are actually beneficial for everyone involved 
as opposed to using these dark psychology techniques simply to hurt other 


people and get whatever it was that you were craving or wanting. 


When you are willing to use dark psychology with the intention of doing 
real good in the world, you may find that the techniques and tools take a 
different light. There may be some that you choose to avoid, but there could 
also be others that are quite compelling to you. For example, what if you 


made it a point to use mind control techniques, but instead of convincing 


the other person that she was not good enough or too loud for you, you 
boosted her confidence, reminding her of how capable and beautiful she 
was? Suddenly, that technique that used to be insidious is actually quite 
compassionate. 

This chapter will serve to wrap everything up once and for all. Within this 
chapter, you will look at the harm that dark psychology can do to an 
individual. You will see several signs of manipulation and abuse. Then, you 
will be provided with an explanation of ethical dark psychology, as well as 
a brief guide to ensuring that your own usage remains ethical. Lastly, you 
will be shown several examples of dark psychology techniques being used 


in ways that are helpful and benevolent rather than harmful and destructive. 


Ethical Dark Psychology 


As the name implies, ethical dark psychology would be the usage of dark 
psychology in ways that are not implicitly harmful. Of course, many people 
may argue that dark psychology is wrong, no matter who uses it simply 
because it accesses one’s mind, the most private part of one’s self. 
Nevertheless, if you can keep your dark psychology ethical, you can find 
that you are actually doing plenty of good. That good energy that you put 
out into the world will help several people, and you never know just how 
far that ripple of one good deed will flow. 

This section will address five questions that you can ask in order to 
determine whether you are harmful or malicious in your attempts to get 


results from other people. 


What is my intention? Who will this benefit? 
Am | confident that | have made the right choice? 
Am | being honest? 


Will this interaction help the other personlong-term? 


Will this damage the trusting relationship between us? 


What is the intention of this interaction? Who will this benefit? 


This question is the first one in the list—it is designed to make sure that 
whatever you are doing is not solely designed to benefit you. Remember, 
manipulators are those who tend to manipulate simply because they wish to 
take control of other people and serve themselves. When you are able to 


answer honestly that you have no interest in serving yourself but would 
rather see that other people are the ones benefitting, you are on the right 


track. 


Am I confident that I am doing the right thing with this interaction? 


This question forces you to figure out whether or not you are doing 
something that you truly believe is right or if you are doing something that 
you feel obligated to do or something that you know is ethically or morally 
ambiguous or simply wrong. When you can answer that you are, in fact, 
confident that you have chosen to do the right thing, no matter how you are 
approaching or interacting with someone else, then you can guarantee that 
you are actually going to be able to sleep with yourself. Remember, the true 
manipulators, the true ones that cause harm, do not care about this. They do 


not care that they are hurting people, so long as they get what they want. 


Am I being honest here? 


Now, this right here can eliminate several tactics from your repertoire that 
has been built up thus far if you are truly looking to remain ethical. 
However, you must make sure that you remember that people have their 
own free wills. You must be willing to respect that to ensure that you can 
actually make them happy or benefit them without assuming that they need 
someone there, holding their hand, and treating them like a baby that is 
incapable of caring for themselves. If you can do this effectively, you will 
be able to maintain their own autonomy. 


Will this interaction benefit the other person in the long-term? 


This once again causes you to look at whether or not your actions are 
beneficial to the other party. You need to make sure that what you have 
chosen to do is something that you are confident will help the other party; 
otherwise, who are you helping? Most likely, the only other option would 


be yourself, and you should not be using people as a means to an end. 


Will my choice in method allow a relationship based on trust to 
develop? 


This is the last question to ask yourself and is perhaps one of the most 
important. Will the way that you have chosen to influence the other person 
to damage your relationship with them, or will they still be able to trust 
you? Would they be able to trust you if you happened to tell them what you 
have done? If you have to feel like whatever you are doing must be hidden 
from the person that you are interacting with, it may be time to reconsider 
your tactics and what you seek to achieve. After all, you should not be 
making people feel like they do not get a say or like you think you know 
better than they do about what they want or need. 


Signs of Manipulation 


If you do find yourself on the receiving end of dark psychology with no 
regard for whether or not it is ethical, you may notice that you are suffering 
regularly. You will start to develop telltale signs of emotional abuse and 
manipulation. You may not be able to articulate it, but reading over this list 
could open your eyes to the truth. This section will go over five traits 


common to victims of manipulation. 


You feel depressed around the manipulator 


Especially if the manipulator is a partner of yours, it is common for you to 
feel like you are depressed or unhappy. This is because you have so much 
going on, even though you do not realize it. Behind the scenes, you are 
suffering from worsening self-esteem and confidence. Your demeanor is 


becoming more timid and resigned. 
You feel an immense obligation to the manipulator 
If you have been in a relationship of any kind with the manipulator, 


platonic, romantic, familial, or otherwise, you may be surprised to realize 
that you feel incredibly obligated to your abuser. This is often because 


obligation comes from manipulation, and you have been made to become 


obligated to the manipulator to allow for further control over you. 


You have had to change to fit with your partner 


This is a huge red flag—if you feel like you have changed recently, 
especially if other people are also commenting that you seem like you have 
changed recently, it is entirely possible that you have, in fact, changed, and 
that is problematic for everyone involved. While relationships do involve 
both parties bettering each other, you should never feel like you have to 


change to make the relationship work. 


You feel like the manipulator is unpredictable 


Despite potentially living with the person, you realize that you cannot 
predict how the manipulator will be responding to situations. They may not 
care about whatever has happened, or they may be incredibly frustrated 
about it, but you have no idea which it will be. It may seem like the other 
person is constantly volatile and changing, even when it is something 


minor. 


You are constantly feeling worthless 


Relationships should be full of each other, valuing each other. However, the 
manipulator will oftentimes completely devalue you. They want you to 
think that you are dumb and not worth listening to—that means that you 
will be complacent and easier to control. If you are too busy worrying or 


feeling like you do not have the self-esteem to protect or encourage your 


own personal growth, you may find that you actually need to get out of the 
relationship altogether. It is entirely possible that you have a manipulator 
constantly devaluing anything and everything that you do. If you do 
something, they immediately tell you that it does not matter or that they will 


not really acknowledge it even though it may have been a big deal to you. 


Malicious Dark Psychology 


Now, let us take one final look at what malicious dark psychology may look 
like. Imagine that you feel like you constantly need to be showered with 
lavish attention and affection. You do not know why you need it, but as 
long as you have lived, you have felt that desire to always be the center of 
attention. You will intentionally do things that gain you negative attention 
simply because negative attention is better than no attention, though 
recently, you have noticed that your partner has been feeling quite bothered 
by this. 


Instead, you choose to change your tactics. You choose to guilt-trip your 
partner at every turn. You tell your partner that you do not feel appreciated 
and that if they had appreciated you more, then you would not be so upset. 
You tell your partner that you do not think that you can be in a long-term 
relationship with someone who is not loving enough. You lay down the 
guilt and threaten to leave if your partner is not more attentive to your 
needs, even though your partner is already struggling to spend time with 
you, work, and get enough sleep. You demand more and more, despite there 


not being much more to give. 


Nevertheless, your partner desperately tries to give you more and actively 
attempts to spend more time with you. Your partner starts sleeping even less 
frequently and has a health scare. Instead of being compassionate, you 
continue to threaten your partner and then eventually just leave because you 


did not get the love you felt entitled to. 


This is an example of emotional manipulation and guilt-tripping, both of 
which are incredibly unfair to do. The partner ends up feeling alone, 


heartbroken and wondering why they could not do anything right. 


Notice how the partner kept trying to push his or her needs away until there 
was no more give. This is typical in dark psychology—the victim is often 
trained to feel like their own needs are problematic or should be completely 


foregone. 


Benevolent Dark Psychology 


Despite sounding kind of like an oxymoron, you can absolutely have dark 
psychology that has been designed to be benevolent. You could choose, for 
example, to make sure that whatever you are doing is meant to raise up the 
other party rather than dragging him or her down with you. You could make 
it a point to ensure that you are always honest with those around you and 
that you are always conscientious about people having their own opinions 
and free wills. No matter the form you may make sure that your influence 
takes, you want to ensure that it is ethical. From there, it will be a matter of 
judgment call for yourself. 

Nevertheless, here are several situations in which dark psychology could be 


used to help someone: 
Convincing someone to buy something that is genuinely better for them 


Though it may be easier to think that people always have their own best 
interests in mind, that is not always the case. Sometimes, people will be on 
the road to making risky decisions that are going to impact them for a 
significant amount of time, and in those instances, you may be able to use 
your persuasive techniques and ability to build a rapport with ease in order 
to convince someone else that they are making a bad decision. For example, 
imagine that your friend has decided to buy a sports car for their family car. 
However, your friend is a single mother with custody of an infant—where 
will she fit the car seat? You can see that the decision does not make sense, 
but you cannot seem to convince your friend that she is making the wrong 
decision until you break out the persuasive principles to gently persuade her 


to do something that is in her own best interest. 


Helping someone through a panic attack 


As already briefly touched upon earlier, you can use body language to sort 
of eliminate panic attacks. However, that is not always the easiest thing to 
do when you are actively panicking. However, if you see a friend that is 
having a panic attack, it is far easier for you to go up to that friend and ask 
if they need any help than it would otherwise be, all because you will be 
able to help. You can begin to mirror your friend almost immediately and 
start encouraging mirroring on his end. His heart rate should slow as his 
breathing regulates to yours, and he should begin to calm down relatively 


quickly. 


Presenting yourself fairly for an interview 


If you are going to an interview, you may be well aware that the nerves that 
come along with that initial drive and walk can be incredibly intimidating. 
Nevertheless, knowing how best to overcome, that means that you will be 
able to fight off the urge to run or do something else destructive. Instead, 
you can use your ability to read body language and to alter your own to help 
you make sure that you put your best foot forward and that you could 


respond to the actions of your interviewer effectively. 
Parenting children effectively 
Children are notoriously difficult to put up with, especially during the teen 


years, when they think they know everything. Of course, they do not, and 


usually, there ends up being some sort of clash or disagreeability when 


trying to keep the kids on task. When this happens, however, you can 
always make it a point to use your ability to wield dark psychology. In this 
case, you may make it a point to use persuasion to really convince them that 
their decisions are not particularly smart and that they can make better ones, 
such as listening to you. 


Conclusion 


Congratulations! You have arrived at the end of How to Analyze People 
with Dark Psychology. Hopefully, this has been an incredibly informative 
process for you. As always, with psychology topics, it can be difficult to 
find a book and a topic that is truly interesting and also easy to understand, 
but it is with my utmost hope that you found this book to be interesting, 
easily understood, helpful, and actionable. You have spent the last several 
chapters learning how best to utilize dark psychology and how to analyze 
other people. These skills are crucial if you want to be a successful adult in 
the real world, and yet so many people simply lack the capacity or ability to 


wield either of these. 


Remember, you were first guided through how to analyze people. You were 
told why analyzing others works and how important it is to know how to do 
it. You were guided through identifying personality types and how best to 
use that information in order to gain special insight into the minds of others 
.You were taught about the difference between verbal and nonverbal 
communication, as well as the several aspects that exist in nonverbal 
communication. You then read through the five different forms of nonverbal 
communication—kinesics, oculesics, proxemics, haptics, and vocalics in 
order to better learn how to approach any situation with ease. You were 
given a guide on how to read body language, and how to control and falsify 
it as well. From there, you were taught about deception and lying, and 
finally, you wrapped up with dark psychology teaching you anything that 
you would need to know to tie together analyzing others and the skills 


involved in dark psychology. 


Of course, there is still plenty for you to learn. Just because you have 
dipped in the tip of your toe does not mean that you are an expert. From 
here, you could delve further into dark psychology. Several concepts have 
been briefly introduced within this book, such as _neuro-linguistic 
programming, the principles of persuasion, and mind control. You can begin 
to learn so much more about dark psychology if you continue to delve into 


more books on the subject. 


Perhaps instead, you think that you would be better served addressing 
emotional intelligence. After all, two of the skills discussed within this book 
were specifically about how to use emotional intelligence—how to self- 
regulate and how to be self-aware. Maybe you choose to look into 
cognitive behavioral therapy, another line of psychology that is interested in 
observing the cycle between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and how they 


all interact with each other. 


As this book comes to a close, remember that your dark psychology usage 
should always be ethical—you should always be choosing to act in ways 
that are not harmful to others. You should be attempting to avoid harm 
whenever possible when using these techniques, as several of them can lead 


to irreparable damage. 


No matter what it is that you choose to do next, however, make sure that 
you remember to stay true to your morals. Do not use dark psychology to 
hurt other people whenever you can avoid it. Make sure that you are always 
actively trying to help those in your area, and do your best to ensure that 


you do not end up victimized yourself. 


Thank you so much for allowing me to join you on this journey. While this 
book is coming to a close, the rest of your journey has not. There are 
several other books that will relate to this one if you have found this one 
particularly useful or compelling. 

Finally, if this book has served you well, a review on Amazon is always 
incredibly well received and appreciated. Thank you once more, and good 
luck on your journey through understanding dark psychology. Remember, 


this was only the beginning. 


Manipulation and Dark Psychology 


Learn the Art of Persuasion by Influencing 
People with Secret Techniques of Dark 
Psychology, Mind Control and PNL for A 


Successful Life 


Introduction 


Congratulations on purchasing Manipulation and Dark Psychology, and 


thank you for doing so. 


Consider a time where someone made you feel guilty. Perhaps you told 
your partner that you were tired, but you got called into work and cannot 
possibly go on that elaborate anniversary date night that you two had 
planned for weeks. You work a job where you are crucial, and they cannot 
easily replace you, and you feel like you have no choice but to go in. Your 
partner, instead of being understanding about the predicament, looks at you 
and sadly sighs, saying, “You know, I was really, really looking forward to 
our date. It’s already paid for and non-refundable, and I can’t believe that 
you would have to work on our anniversary when you requested it off two 
months ago.” Your partner sighs again and slowly and sadly starts to take 
off shoes and coat. You are left feeling incredibly guilty as you walk out the 


door, but you have no choice. 


You were just the victim of an attempt to guilt-trip you into refusing to go to 


work that day. 


Guilt-tripping is a commonly used form of manipulation, especially when 
people want to make someone else feel bad. They will say things that lead 
the other person to feel guilty about having to refuse to do something, no 
matter how reasonable that refusal may have been, in an attempt to force 
the other person’s hand. This is more or less what manipulation seeks to do 
—it is designed to make the other person feel guilty and less in control of 


the situation. Because guilt is a driving motivator for most people, that 


feeling of guilt is like a call to action—a warning that you are not fulfilling 
your obligations, and that can be enough for the manipulator to get the 


upper hand. 


Manipulation is limited to instilling feelings of guilt—in fact; there are 
several other common, far more insidious ways to manipulate others in 
order to get what you want. You can literally control minds if you know 
how to do so and can get the right rapport. You can trigger people to do 
things that you never thought they would be willing to do. You can 
effectively influence people to do just about anything if you know what you 


are doing. 


Forms of influence designed to force people into obedience without them 
ever truly being aware of what is happening are known as covert 
manipulation, and they are the favorite weapons of those who practice what 
is commonly known as dark psychology—these are people such as 
narcissists, psychopaths, and sadists who do not care about those around 
them. This book is designed to provide you with a guide to influence and 
manipulation, as commonly seen in dark psychology, as well as how to 
utilize these tools in order to wield the tools of dark psychology for 
benevolent or beneficial reasons rather than simply to exert power and 


coerce people into obedience. 


Within this book, you will be given a guide to recognizing what 
manipulation is, why it occurs, and how. You will learn about persuasion, a 
secondary form of influence that focuses more on convincing the other 
person to obey rather than forcing their hand. You will be introduced to 


neuro-linguistic processing, another process that those who practice dark 


psychology tend to wield, and lastly, you will address how to improve your 
communication and NLP skills in ways that are conducive to living a 


successful, happy life. 


There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for 
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much 


useful information as possible; please enjoy! 


Chapter 1: What is Manipulation? 


If you could force people to obey you, would you do it? If you could force 
the hand of someone else, even though you knew that they did not want to 
do what you were asking, would you be willing to do so? Perhaps you 
really need to borrow $5000 for a down payment on a car, but your parents 
are unwilling to give it to you. Maybe you really want to borrow your 
friend’s new motorcycle to experiment on it, but they are reluctant because 
you do not have a license. How likely are you to make it a point to move 
forward? What if your friend is in a relationship with someone who is 
abusive or just not right for her? Would you do anything in your power to 


convince her to end the relationship? 


All of that and more is possible with the power of manipulation. When you 
are able to manipulate people, you are effectively managing to influence the 
mind of the other person. You are able to figure out how best to control the 
other person and ensure that you can, in fact, take over once and for all. You 
can use your understanding of the other person’s mind in order to get them 
to do just about anything. If you can play your cards right, you can covertly 
access the mind of someone else, install all of the right strings, and play the 


other person like a puppet. 


This skill can be incredibly useful to you if you know what you are doing. 
You can figure out how best to take control of the mind of someone else. 
You can convince them to do your bidding, whether for your own or their 
own benefit. This chapter will introduce you to manipulation as a concept. 


You will learn how manipulation works as a concept. Lastly, you will be 


provided with several examples of types of manipulation that you may 


encounter in your daily life. 


Manipulation 


By definition, manipulation is a form of social influence that is designed to 
change either behaviors or perceptions of other people through methods that 
are deceptive in some way. Usually, the purpose is to allow the manipulator 
to get what he or she wants, even if it is at the expense of his or her target. 
Effectively, it is finding a way to coercively and secretly exploit someone 


else into doing what you want or need them to do. 


When you manipulate someone else, you have your own ulterior motive 
that you are pushing. You want to ensure that your desired result happens, 
regardless of whether it impacts you versus your child. For example, telling 
your child that he must tell the truth or you are going to die would be a form 
of emotional manipulation. You are putting excessive weight on the 
consequence that would never happen in order to coerce your child into 
telling you something. You may be trying to get him to tell the truth, but 


you are also doing so in a way that is emotionally harmful to the child. 


Sometimes, manipulation is a bit more difficult to spot—it can be finding 
ways to use insecurities against the victim without them being spotted. No 
matter what, however, what holds true is that manipulation is designed to 
override everyone’s inherent right to free will. This is not something to be 
proud of or to accept—if you are on the receiving end of manipulation, you 
should be trying to protect that free will as much as you can. If you are the 


manipulator, you may need to reconsider your motives and tactics. 


Keep in mind as you read through the rest of this chapter that this book does 
not condone the active and excessive use of manipulation. Controlling 
people is typically considered quite underhanded and cruel, and it should 
not be occurring on the regular, or at all if it can be avoided. It can be 
valuable to understand the art of manipulation in order to understand how 
the mind works, or how manipulators will attack, but ultimately, the use of 


true manipulation is not recommended. 


The Process of Manipulation 


People tend to believe that manipulation is effective for different reasons. 
They have different ideas about what makes manipulation effective. In 
particular, there are three criteria involving the manipulator that must be 
met in order to ensure that manipulation is successful. Ultimately, it is the 
manipulator that is primarily responsible for the manipulation and 
determining whether it will work, though there are certain personality traits 
that tend to be particularly vulnerable to the attempts to manipulate. The 
three criteria that must be met to ensure successful manipulation are: 


e The manipulator must hide the true intentions 


e The manipulator must know the victim’s most viable 


vulnerabilities 
e The manipulator must be ruthless enough to follow through 


Keep in mind that these three criteria being present is not a guarantee that 
the manipulation will always work. However, they must be present if it will 


work. 
Hiding true intentions 


If someone came up to you and said, “I am going to force you to buy me 
dinner,” you would be likely to outright refuse. People tend to be contrarian 
—they will lean toward doing the exact opposite of what someone else is 
asserting that they do simply because they want to have their free will. 
Because of this, manipulation only really works well when the true 
intentions are hidden. This way, the victim is unaware of the manipulation 


taking place and is more likely to fall for it. They will be unsuspecting and, 


therefore, more susceptible as opposed to if they were already on guard and 


looking for any attempts to force their hands. 


Understanding vulnerabilities 


Ultimately, the only way that you can possibly get to someone is if you 
know where their weak spots are. By taking advantage of the other party’s 
weak spots, you can effectively figure out exactly how to present what you 
want in order to ensure they give it to you. For example, if you know that 
you are dealing with a people pleaser, you may make it a point to mention 
that you have this really important need that you want to figure out how to 
meet and word it in just the right way that cues the other person to ask if 
they can help. This is an example of a vulnerability. Others can include: 


e They need to be given external approval 
e Fear of negative emotions 

e Unassertiveness 

e Struggling to know one’s true self 

e Struggling with self-reliance 

e Feeling out of control 

e Being naive 

e Lacking self-confidence 

e Being too conscientious 


Of course, there are other vulnerabilities as well, and you can begin to 
pinpoint more personal ones as well if you know what you are doing. Your 
job when manipulating others will be to figure out those vulnerabilities and 


use them. 


Ruthlessness 


Ultimately, manipulation is quite often harmful to at least one party that is 
being victimized. In most cases, the one being manipulated stands to lose 
something, and most people feel guilty at the idea of costing someone else 
something personal. For this reason, the successful manipulator must not 
care about the other person enough to be able to shirk off the guilt that 
would come along with hurting them. For many people, they are simply too 
empathetic to completely disregard everyone else. For others, however, it 
becomes effortless to simply disregard any guilt over feeling like they have 
used the other party. They move on with their lives after getting what they 


want without ever batting an eye. 


Manipulation Tactics 


Typically, manipulators exert some sort of control over their targets. They 
would have to in order to truly get their way. However, no two manipulators 
are the same. Some may favor positive reinforcement, while others prefer to 
punish. No matter the method, there is no denying that the manipulation can 


be exhausting, unhealthy, and sometimes completely dangerous. 


Within this section, we will identify the five distinct tactics that 
manipulators tend to use. Keep in mind that these tactics are separate from 
the techniques that will be discussed shortly. The tactics are sort of 
categories of different forms of manipulation—they are the most simplified 
form of classifying the techniques that you will be introduced to, and they 
use some sort of psychological tendency or process in order to control the 


other person. 
Positive reinforcement 


Rather than looking at positive as something good, think of positive as 
being provided or given something. When you are given positive 
reinforcement to encourage you to do something, you are introduced to 
some sort of motivator. You will get something as a direct result of your 


choice in action or in order to get you to do something. 


Action Positive Action 
performed atention/result reinforced 


For example, one form of positive reinforcement is being given praise or a 
reward for completing a task as you were expected to do. In particular, 
during manipulation, you may be offered praise if you do the right thing 
without being asked or encouraged to do it. Ultimately, it is designed to 
encourage. Other forms of positive reinforcement include: 


e Praise 

e Public recognition 
e Facial expressions 
e Approval 

e Love or affection 
e Gifts 


Negative reinforcement 


Negative reinforcement, on the other hand, involves using negative 
situations with the removal from that negative situation as the reward. 
When you are provided negative reinforcement, you are effectively being 
told that if you do something, a negative situation will be remedied in some 
way. This uses the negative situation and the desire to be rescued from that 


negativity as the motivation to push you toward a certain action. 


Negative Action Removal of Action 
situation performed negativity reinforced 


For example, imagine that you are in a bit of a bind—you may realize that 
you are $1000 short for your bills in three days and be panicking. A 
manipulator may say that they will give you that $1000 and therefore save 


you from the uncomfortable and terrifying potential of losing one’s home. 
Another example could involve telling a child that they will not have to do 


the dishes if they do whatever you want instead. 


Intermittent reinforcement 


Intermittent reinforcement refers to only sometimes providing positive 
reinforcement. Doing so causes doubt, fear, and a desire to keep trying to 
fish for that approval or positive reinforcement that is desired. The absence 
of whatever is being offered up intermittently can cause people to work 
harder to get it. 


Perhaps the easiest way to understand intermittent reinforcement is to look 
at gambling. In gambling, you are occasionally able to win, but most of the 
time, you lose. The occasional win and the knowledge that you have the 
chance to win are both enough for people to continually pour money into 
gambling, even though they are probably losing out on more money than 


they have ever won back. 


This form of reinforcement may be the most effective—it causes the 
individual to effectively become addicted to the chase toward success or 
fulfillment. Think about an abusive relationship for a moment—the victim 
will oftentimes become addicted to the intermittent reinforcement of the 
honeymoon period within the cycle of abuse, and that is enough to keep the 


individual stuck. 


Punishment 


When discussing punishment, you are thinking about the sudden inclusion 
of something negative as a response to a failure or refusal that is meant to 
be unpleasant in order to encourage the other person to act as you are 
hoping for. This causes the other party to give in, oftentimes, because the 
other party on the receiving end of the punishment is afraid or hurt, either 
physically or emotionally, and they want to avoid that same result in the 
first place. 


Think of fines when you get a ticket—the money you pay is, in part, 
administrative to take care of the cost of the police officer who issued the 
fine and the judge presiding over it. However, most of that fine is designed 
to punish you. You are losing out on a set amount of money because you 


have committed some sort of crime. 


Some examples of punishment include: 
e Yelling 


e Hurting (physically, i.e. spanking) 
e Playing the victim 


e The silent treatment 


e Nagging 


e Blackmail 


Traumatic one-trial learning 


Finally, traumatic learning refers to the use of abuse or trauma in very 
specific instances in order to train the other party to feel like they must 
concede to avoid triggering such abuse in the future. Effectively, you are 
getting direct obedience through terrifying the other party into obedience in 
the first place. This is among some of the more harmful types of 


manipulation that people receive. 


Undesired 
action 
performed 


Manipulator 
severely 
punishes 


Action 
discouraged 


For example, you may find that you have returned home for the family for 
the holidays, and your partner drove over just a bit later—no big deal, 
sometimes families drive separately. However, your partner is furious that 
you went rather than staying home where you would have been present with 
him. He then screams at you about how you are never home or present for 
him and goes onto a rampage. The message that he is trying to send is that 
upsetting him is never worth it. Some forms of this include: 


e Abuse of any kind 
e Establishing dominance 


e Allowing emotions to blow out of control 


Manipulation Techniques 


Manipulation comes in several forms beyond those five different tactics. 
Some people may gaslight while others love bomb and devalue. Others still 
may choose to delve into mind control. There are several different 
manipulation techniques that can all be used in various situations, meaning 
that you always have plenty of options. What may work in one situation is 
not necessarily guaranteed to work in another, and most of the time, 
manipulators will have several different techniques in their back pocket to 


draw from as needed. 


Understanding each of these different forms of manipulation means that you 
can be prepared. When you are prepared, you become less susceptible to 
that form of manipulation. You will effectively be able to protect yourself 
because you know what the patterns are and can recognize them as they 
occur, allowing you to figure out giving in. This section will provide an 


explanation of the eight common methods that are used. 
Love bombing and devaluing 


This form of manipulation is particularly common in relationships with 
narcissists. The manipulator will shower the other person with love and 
gifts to essentially addict the individual to them. Then, when the 
manipulator wants something that is not being given, that love will 
suddenly be revoked, often with intentionally hurting or knocking the 
individual down a few pegs. They may stop responding or tell the victim 
that they no longer care about the other person. The idea is to make the 
victim desire that love bombing stage again to get them to work extra hard 


to attain it. It usually occurs in a cycle. 


Showering 
victim with 
love 


Victim tries to Love is slowly 
win back withheld 


favor more 


Victirn 
suddenly 
rejected 


This is the quintessential form of intermittent reinforcement. 


Gaslighting 


In gaslighting, the manipulator seeks to make the other party feel entirely 
incompetent and doubtful of whether or not they can truly accurately 
identify what is going on around them. The whole point is to make them 
feel unstable, and like their perceptions of reality, are incorrect. For 
example, they may tell the victim that the victim’s perception never 
happened, or that the victim is making things out to be far worse than they 
actually were. The gaslighter will deny and reject thoughts and opinions so 
convincingly that the victim will trust the gaslighter, and over time, the 


gaslighter will retain complete control. 
The silent treatment 
This is a common form of punishment in abusive situations. During the 


silent treatment, the person who is being ignored will be entirely erased— 
the individual will not acknowledge their presence or that they have said or 


done anything. If the one being ignored says something, the one ignoring 
will stare right past them. The entire purpose of this is to make the other 
person feel the displeasure that the manipulator is feeling. It can also lead to 
the individual being manipulated to be so desperate to get back to the way 


things used to be that they will comply with any requests provided. 


Guilt-tripping 


The guilt trip tactic is designed to make the person being manipulated feel 
guilty simply because guilt is a motivating emotion, and the feeling of guilt 
is one that drives people to do whatever they can to alleviate it. If you are 
able to guilt-trip someone, you effectively make them feel like the only way 
they can escape that guilt is through doing whatever you have asked them to 
do. For example, your sibling may tell you that they cannot afford to keep 
their home if you do not lend them the money and that if you refuse, it will 


be on you if their children are removed or if your sibling loses custody. 


Playing the victim 


Oftentimes, the manipulator will spin things around, so they reflect that the 
manipulator is actually the victim of the circumstances rather than the 
aggressor of the situation. For example, if a manipulator gets into an 
argument with someone else, they may tell everyone else that they were the 
victim in some way, shape, or form in order to gain sympathy. They will 
twist the truth in order to make sure that they are believed to not be 


responsible for whatever has happened. 


Scapegoating 


In scapegoating, someone else is made to take the fall for a situation. They 
may push all of their faults onto the scapegoat, particularly when a child is 
involved, but they may also simply refuse to give the same consideration to 
the one being scapegoated. This is another form of intermittent 


reinforcement. 


Mind control 


Another common method of manipulation is through mind control. When 
you are controlling the mind of someone else, you are effectively swaying 
them to do something that they do not want to do, even if it is not 
necessarily what they would want to do. This is usually a method that takes 
plenty of time, however, as the one doing the controlling has to first get into 
a trusted position with the person, then slowly work up to the situation and 


then take it when the time is right. 


Covert intimidation 


This refers to the sort of intimidation where you are not quite sure why you 
are feeling scared, but you cannot help it. You simply feel like something is 
going to go wrong or that there is some sort of problem that you will face if 
you do not make it a point to first do what was expected of you. In covert 
intimidation, you cannot quite put your finger on it, but you know that 


something is making you uneasy. 


Chapter 2: When and Why to use Manipulation 


Now, are you curious why people would choose to use this sort of 
manipulation? Why does anyone need that level of control over someone 
else’s actions or feelings? Who would use these forms of manipulation? 
Who actually is ruthless enough to follow through without guilt or regret? 
All of those are fantastic questions, and this chapter seeks to answer as 
many of those questions as possible. When these questions are answered, 


your portrait of the manipulator will become all the clearer. 


Who Manipulates? 


Manipulators come in several forms. Some are younger and simply have 
not learned how to interact with the world. Others still just happen to be 
manipulative by nature—they are intentionally using their abilities to get 
what they want with no regard for how it hurts other people. Ultimately, 
however, the manipulators tend to have several traits in common. This 
section will address several traits and tendencies that can help you identify 


a manipulator in the process of manipulating. 
They are always the victim 


It does not matter what has happened—the manipulator will always be the 
victim or not at fault in some way. The manipulator could pull out a gun 
and shoot you and would rationalize that he had no choice and insist that he 
was the victim as he holds the smoking gun in his hand. This is a common 
trait of manipulators as it makes them deserving of sympathy, which gives 
them the upper hand in many different situations. They will try to figure out 
how to get all of your friends and family on their side and will blame 
everything on you. The worst part is that since they are so skillful at doing 


exactly this, they can often convince other people to fall for it. 
They regularly distort the truth 


The manipulator will always twist reality. Skilled at weaving webs of lies, 
the manipulator will always have a way to rewrite history, change a 
situation, or otherwise make it, so their narrative is the correct one. One 
such example is playing the victim. Other times, they may simply make up 


lies because the lies suit them, such as saying that they are struggling to get 


to work because there was a car accident and that they will be there soon, or 
claiming that they cannot go outside to get to their car because a bear is 
sitting next to it. Some lies may seem incredibly unconvincing, but they 


will vehemently insist that he is telling the truth. 


They are passive-aggressive 


Manipulators tend to be passive-aggressive. A part of this is to make sure 
that you know your place around the manipulator—they use it to assert 
dominance and covertly exert their own influence and desire over you. For 
example, they will intentionally use passive-aggression to make you feel 
bad, and then be satisfied that they held power necessary to make you feel 


bad in the first place. 


They will pressure you 


The manipulator is convinced that he is always right no matter what, and 
with that in mind, he will not hesitate to pressure you in order to get 
whatever he wants from you at any given moment. He knows that his way 


is the right way, and he will force the point until you agree. 


They will not work to solve a problem 


If you find that there is a problem with the manipulator, good luck—they 
will not work to come to some sort of solution. Instead, they will continue 
on as if nothing is wrong, or at the very least, that nothing is wrong with 
them. They could not care more about your own problems, so long as they 


are not the manipulator’s problems. 


They will always keep the advantage 


The manipulator has an uncanny way to always remain in control in nearly 
any situation. They will oftentimes find a way to ensure that they can find a 
way to stay in charge. They will always pick the restaurant that you go to, 
or they will always invite you out of your comfort zone and into theirs, all 
done intentionally to maintain power and control over the situation. When 
they do this, they effectively guarantee that they are able to stay in charge 
long enough to keep you off balance and make sure that they always have 


the upper hand. 


They will always have excuses 


When they do happen to make a mistake, manipulators typically will have 
some sort of excuse. There was a car accident on the way over, or they just 
got fired for no reason at all. It does not matter what the problem is; there 
will be some sort of excuse that will arise to take the blame away from the 


manipulator and push it onto someone else. 


They will make you feel unconfident 


Something about the manipulator will always leave you feeling incompetent 
and unable to do anything right. This means that you will constantly be 
feeling like you are the problem rather than seeing that the whole problem 


may have been resting firmly with the manipulator all along. 


Why Manipulate? 


Manipulators have all sorts of reasons to manipulate others, with some 
simply having no reason at all. When you begin to understand the 
motivation behind these drives, you may be more inclined to understand 
those techniques that the manipulators everywhere tend to use. This means 
then that you will be able to figure out how to fight back. You can defend 
yourself and others based on the knowledge that you have. Knowing why 
people manipulate others can be a critical skill to develop if you want to be 
successful in the world around you. 


They want to advance in life 


When you feel like you need to advance somehow, whether due to needing 
the money in order to get what you wanted or needed, manipulation is one 
way to get it. When you manipulate someone, you are usually using them as 
a sort of stepping stone for yourself in order to ensure that you can, in fact, 


withstand future struggles while also progressing the agenda that you have. 


Typically, this is the most selfish of the reasons on this list—these 


manipulators do so simply because they can. 


They need power and superiority 


Similar to the last reason for manipulation, oftentimes, manipulators need to 
feel like they are in power. They simply are only secure in themselves so 
long as they are in a position of power over other people. If they feel like 
their superiority will be questioned in any way, shape, or form, they will 
feel insecure. They will feel like the only way they can make themselves 
feel comfortable is if they exert and enforce their own superiority, which 
they give themselves through making a point to manipulate those around 


them. 


They need control 


When people are particularly controlling, they may find that manipulation is 
one of the easiest ways to get the results desired. When you are able to 
manipulate someone else into doing what they need to do, you are able to 
ensure that you maintain control in nearly any situation. You may have to 
find a way to covertly encourage the other person to do what you want, but 
as soon as you manage to do that, you can effectively maintain control, 
even if the other person does not realize that you are in control of the 
situation at hand. The need to be in control can be particularly motivating 


for people when it comes to deciding to manipulate. 


They need to manipulate to better their own self-esteem 


Some people, such as narcissists, tend to feel like they are only comfortable 
with themselves when other people are lavishing them with attention or 
admiration. These people tend to result in manipulation to get that attention, 
especially if they are not particularly outstanding or deserving of attention 
in the first place. In manipulating other people into giving them the craved 


attention, they are able to feel better about themselves. 


They are bored 


Some people simply enjoy watching the world burn and will make it a point 
to manipulate other people simply to get entertainment. They treat it like a 
game or a challenge, intentionally testing boundaries to see how far they 
can get with no real reason or motivation beyond being bored to guide 
them. These may be some of the more dangerous manipulators as they have 
no real goal in mind—they simply want to wreak havoc and spend some 
time messing with other people despite not getting anything other than their 


own Satisfaction in return. 


They have a hidden agenda 


More often than not, the manipulator has some sort of reason to manipulate 
those around him or her. This is typically hidden from the target but can be 
figured out with enough time and information. Think about how some 
people will intentionally seek out vulnerable people with ulterior motives. 
They may marry in order to get their hands on money, or intentionally 
volunteer as a caregiver for an elderly family member in order to steal 
money from them. No matter what the hidden agenda is, the manipulator 


has good cause to try to keep it hidden. 


They do not properly identify with the emotions of others 


Sometimes, the manipulation is unintentional and a side effect of simply 
being unable to identify with other people. Effectively, they lack empathy, 
and that lack of empathy is enough to make it so they cannot easily identify 
when they have done something that is manipulative, nor do they 
automatically recognize when what they have done is problematic. These 
are people who simply do not understand social norms for some reason or 


another. They may have a personality or other mental health disorder. 


When Manipulation Occurs 


No one wants to be on the receiving end of manipulation, and yet it seems 
to be all around us. The world is literally surrounded by different people 
and their attempts to manipulate. You can see it on television and in the 
media. You can see it in religion and politics. It happens in all kinds of 
relationships when they become unhealthy. There is no real way to truly 
avoid manipulation, and that in and of itself can be incredibly disheartening. 
However, because manipulation is everywhere, it becomes prudent to 
understand what it looks like in a wide variety of situations and cases. You 
want to be able to notice when it is happening and figure out how best to 
fight back from it to ensure that you actually are able to protect yourself. 
When you are able to protect yourself from manipulation, you can 
guarantee that you, at the very least, are not regularly being used by other 


people simply because you refuse to allow yourself to be 


Within this section, we will take a look at manipulation in several different 
relationships and contexts for a brief overview of what to expect and why it 


happens. 
In relationships 


This is particularly referring to romantic relationships. Romantic 
relationships seem to attract manipulation frequently, especially if one 
member of the couple happens to be on the less confrontational side and is 
afraid of ever standing up for him or herself. When this happens, you may 


find that you have run into quite the conundrum—you need to figure out 


how best to leave a romantic relationship rife with manipulation, which can 


be difficult if the manipulator has done his job right. 


In particular, when you are in a relationship and at risk for manipulation, 
you will realize that the other party is likely to completely steamroll over 
the relationship. The other party may try to get you to move quicker than 
you are usually comfortable with, insisting that you advance your 
relationship to the next level in a whirlwind romance. If the person seems 
too good to be true in a situation like that, you can usually assume that it 
was full of manipulation in the first place and should be avoided if at all 


possible. 


In friendships 


Manipulative friends may try to get on your good side as quickly as 
possible, but they will soon fall into the habit of always needing you but 
never being available when you need them. At first, you will assume it is a 
coincidence, but over time, you will realize that it is actually a pattern, 
leaving you stuck to decide whether you would like to leave the friendship 
altogether or if you would prefer to instead put up with the manipulator’s 


lack of support and enjoy what you can. 


In churches 


Churches commonly also manipulate people, attempting to force them into 
situations and actions that they may not necessarily want. In particular, you 
will commonly see threats of damnation and punishment if they do not live 


by a very specific life, and that is a perfect example of manipulation. They 


use their authority to sort of force your hand and make you feel like you 
have no choice but to comply. This is what they count on—they assume that 
you will continue to donate, to serve, and to attend because they threaten 
you if you do not. While many people may not see it as a threat, being told 
that you may be excommunicated or that you will be damned for eternity 


are two ways to sort of scare someone into behaving a certain way. 


In politics 


Politicians frequently attempt to manipulate each other during debates and 
will attempt to manipulate the people during speeches. You can see it in the 
way they hold themselves and how they interact with each other that they 
are trained and scripted on what to do, and even the way that they stand has 
been scripted to avoid any of the typical discomfort signs, such as crossing 
arms. Instead, to be seen as more powerful, they may fiddle with a watch or 


a piece of jewelry to try to hide their gut reaction to show signs of distress. 


In cults 


Cults commonly use brainwashing techniques in which they may tear down 
entire personalities to install their own, more obedient ones in other people. 
They may welcome people with open arms, making them feel like they are 
welcome and will be happy, but over time, the manipulation and 
brainwashing will increase. Eventually, people are left as shells of 
themselves, forced to obey and do whatever they have been told if they 
want to avoid punishment. You can see these in extreme cults in particular, 
and cults can be so effective that leaders can literally command their 


followers to kill themselves or others, and they will do so, such as in the 


Jamestown cult, in which everyone drank flavored drink laced with poison 


as a mass suicide. 


In sales positions 


Sometimes, people in sales positions will have to get crafty with how they 
choose to present themselves in order to guarantee that they can, in fact, 
actually close a sale. They may choose to use certain appeals to authority or 
emotion in an attempt to convince you, or they may try to scare you into 
submission in other instances. No matter the situation, however, it is 
common to see salespeople try all sorts of influential attempts to get you to 
buy something. Even something as simple as asking you a few yes 
questions can be a form of manipulation taken from neuro-linguistic 
programming, depending on if the other party is prepared with the 
techniques. In particular, much of the influence that you will see in sales 


settings tend to be persuasion or NLP. 


In court 


In court, when lawyers are often battling it out to figure out the truth, you 
may see manipulation. Especially if the lawyers happen to be particularly 
eager to prove their own positions, you may run into issues in which both 
parties start flinging manipulative attempts at each other. They may word 
their questions in a loaded manner to try to get the other party to fall for it. 
They may try to frame the other party or pressure them into confessing. 
Ultimately, even though the courtroom is supposed to be particularly 
unbiased, you can frequently see manipulative attempts to control each 


other play out. 


In negotiations 


Negotiations attempts are another area in which you may see attempts to 
manipulate or influence each other. Both parties have a certain desire, and 
they are likely to attempt to get their way in some degree. Of course, 
negotiations also come along with compromise, so some concessions will 
have to be made, but the individual responsible for those concessions may 


change depending on the results of the negotiation. 


Chapter 3: The Power of Persuasion 


Have you ever been trying to figure out what to do for dinner one night only 
to have your partner or child come up to you with a complete argument on 
why you should go to your favorite sushi restaurant for dinner? Perhaps the 
argument is all nicely laid out for you. Your child points out that you would 
not have to cook or clean, which means that you have more time to spend 
with your family, something that is in desperately short supply these days. 
Your child points out that everyone loves sushi, so you cannot go wrong 
going to the restaurant and that the whole family will find something to eat. 
Lastly, your child tells you that he knows that you really want to get some 


sushi because you always want to get some sushi. 


You may realize that your child is right—all of that is true, and you agree to 
go. In this instance, you have just been persuaded to go out to dinner by 
your child. Now, the argument and attempt to persuade may have been 
rather simplified, but it still counts as a form of influence. You were not 
thinking about going out to dinner until your child pointed out all of the 
reasons that you should. This means, then, that your child influenced your 


choice. 


Of course, most of the time, persuasion attempts tend to be a bit less 
obvious. They may be as simple as wording things in a way that is 
conducive to you making a specific decision. They may be pointing out that 
the other party knows best because the other party happens to be an expert 
on whatever is being sold. No matter the form, however, what persuasion 
does that manipulation does not is that it puts the question out in the open 


for everyone to see. 


Slightly more acceptable than its sister form of influence, persuasion 
focuses more on free will than covertly attempting to convince someone to 
give in and be controlled. In particular, you may find that you actually are 
okay with persuasion simply because it is more out in the open than the 
covert attempt to manipulate. They are quite similar, however, and within 


this chapter, you will be introduced to what persuasion is. 


What is Persuasion? 


Persuasion, like manipulation, is a form of social influence. It is designed to 
change the thoughts, feelings, or behaviors of someone else for reasons that 
are listed or dictated for the other person in the bid to get the other person to 
change. This means that the other person is well aware of the attempt early 
on. Just as your child pointed out that you would love to go to sushi for 
dinner, any other form of persuasion is going to be telling you what you 
should be wanting or doing. It will encourage you to do something in 
particular in an attempt to persuade you, but you are still always welcome 


to turn it down and move on with your initial choice. 


Typically, persuasion is incredibly powerful. You are creating an argument 
of some sort for someone else and attempting to follow through with that 
argument. You want other people to see that your argument is valid and that 
you have the right idea. You want to figure out how to do just that without 
there being a clear and easy way to get out of it. All this means that you 
need to figure out what will motivate your target and then figure out how to 
motivate them. This usually happens in several different ways, such as in 
the principles of persuasion or with the understanding and usage of rhetoric. 
What is true, however, is that you should end up with someone who has at 
least some sort of idea about what they want by the end of the attempt. 
They will either agree with you, or they will disagree and move on, and it 


will be up to you to figure out which. 


Persuasion vs. Manipulation 


At face value, the two seem to be intricately linked—they are both attempts 
to convince or cause someone to do something else. However, you likely 
persuade someone nearly every single day, and yet you may make it a point 
to never manipulate others. You are able to toe the line because the two are 


entirely different from each other. 


In particular, however, you must look at the differing definitions of the two 
attempts to influence. In manipulation, you are attempting to change via 
unfair means for one’s own selfish purposes. For persuasion, however, you 


are looking to cause someone to do something. 


This means that primarily, manipulation is unfair or secretive by default—it 
seeks to use and abuse people in order to satisfy the manipulator and 
whatever it is that the manipulator wants. Persuasion, on the other hand, is 
simply a way that people interact with those around them. You are 
attempting to persuade someone to help you because you feel like they may 
be a valuable asset, and you think that they will get something out of it, too. 
You are completely upfront about everything when you attempt to persuade 


someone, however when you manipulate, you are not. 


For example, consider that you really need a ride to work tomorrow for 
some reason. You go up to your neighbor and say, “Hey, you know, I 
noticed that your yard could use some TLC—would you like me to help 
you with that today? I’m free all day!” The neighbor agrees, and the two of 
you happily chat while taking care of yard work. The neighbor, upon 


finishing everything up, asks if you need any help yourself, offering to 


reciprocate. You reply that actually, you need a ride to work, and you would 


greatly appreciate it. 


On the other hand, if you had wanted to manipulate the neighbor into a ride, 
you may have gone out in the morning like usual and desperately tried to 
start your car while groaning loudly and slamming on the steering wheel 
before looking at your watch in exasperation. In this case, you are not 
interacting with the other person directly at all—you are making it clear that 


you are unhappy, but you are not speaking to your neighbor. 


Your neighbor happens to see your plight and offers to help you, getting 
your ride without you ever having to ask for help. That is manipulation. You 
intentionally did something with your own self-interest in mind. You did 
not help your neighbor, and simply took advantage of his kindness when he 


offered to give you a ride without any offer for reciprocity. 


As you can see, manipulation versus persuasion can be a bit complex to 
figure out if you do not know what you are looking at, but it is important. 
Effectively, when you are manipulating someone else, you are attempting to 
make them do something for you without you having to overtly ask for it in 


any way. 


Using Persuasion 


Between the two, persuasion is generally deemed to be socially acceptable 
and something that will not be problematic for you if you were to be on the 
receiving end of it. You may not feel like persuasion is particularly 
threatening in the way that manipulation typically is considered simply 
because when someone attempts to persuade you, they are usually honest 
with you. They will tell you exactly what they want or need and they will 
usually offer up reasons for why you should help them, which may 
sometimes be a negotiation of services or otherwise simply appealing got 
logic or something else to prove that you helping would literally be no 


inconvenience to you, but would be a lifesaver to them. 


When you are planning to use persuasion against someone else, you are 
likely to need some sort of plan. Generally speaking, you will need to know 
exactly what you want and how you need to get to that result. If you want to 
get a job, for example, you may realize that the steps to get a job will 
require you to be applying for jobs and working on your resume as much as 
possible. You may see that there is little room for error and that you will 


need to actively attempt to find that job. 


When you make your plan, you can start to figure out who you will ask for 
help. Do you know anyone with some connections? Do you have a friend 
that works somewhere with job openings? Do you have any skills that can 
get you that job that you really need or want? If you can answer yes to any 
of that, you can figure out who you want to target for your persuasion. After 
all, there always has to be someone on the receiving end when you attempt 


to persuade someone. 


Upon identifying who you will persuade, you must figure out how you wish 
to persuade them. Now, this will be a bit trickier to figure out—there are 
dozens of ways that you could go about trying to persuade someone, and 
ultimately, you will need to choose the one that works best for you. When 
you can identify exactly how you wish to be persuading someone else, you 


can begin to put together the best possible toolset to do so. 


Now, we will not get into the tools for persuasion until the next chapter, so 
hold tight on that particular concept. However, recognize that there are 
several persuasive techniques that can be used, so long as you make it a 
point to use them effectively. With the plan in mind and the tools in mind, 
and recognizing that you are not only persuading to get help, you need to 
figure out what you are willing to offer in return. Why should the other 
person help you? Will you do something in return? Will it benefit them in 
any way? Remember, manipulation is the one that is self-serving. When you 
are persuading someone, everyone should see at least some sort of benefits 


to helping or agreeing to whatever you are attempting to persuade them of. 


Finally, with the who, what, how, and why figured out, you can now attempt 
to use your technique. Now is the time to go up and talk to whomever you 
have identified as the individual that you are asking for help. Remember, 
you should probably try asking them if you can help them before slamming 


onto the theme of everything that you are looking for from them. 


This means that you can make it a point to ask and persuade. You should 
point out all of the reasons that helping would be good for the other person, 


as well as what you will do in return. Persuasion is a give and take, after all, 


and you need to be clear to the other person that you absolutely intend to 
give as well as take to ensure that they do not feel pressured or stuck in the 
process. When you do this, you assure them that you are not simply using 


them, especially once you follow through with helping them. 


Persuasion in the World 


At this point, you should have a generally solid idea that persuasion is 
something that can involve give and take—that either the giver or both 
people should benefit. As a general rule, the taker should never be the only 
one benefitting from persuasion. You can see this happen in several 
contexts. You may see people shopping for a house and notice that 
persuasion happens during the sales. You may see that persuasion happens 
in regular interactions with your romantic partner simply as a side effect to 
the fact that you two regularly interact with each other and will often have 
something or another that you really want or need. You can see it in 
parenting, and in negotiations as well. Leaders are also masters at 
persuasion—especially if they are effective leaders, and you will often see 
that the best leaders are well-loved and incredibly persuasive. They know 
how to wield their tools so well that those around them are always willing 


to help. 


This section will take the time to go over several contexts in which you may 
run into an attempt at persuasion throughout your life. It is incredibly 
common to see persuasion pop up regularly because it is so regularly used 
in terms of interactions. If you want someone to do something, the best way 
to get them to do it is by asking them to do it. If you can do that, you are 


well on your way to persuading them. 


In sales 


When you are buying something, such as a car, you may run into someone 


who is interested in attempting to sell you something that you were not 


necessarily interested in at first. In order to be an attempt at persuasion, the 
newly presented car should do something for you—it should be useful to 
you in some way, shape, or form, and it will be on you to determine if the 
use of that new car is enough to encourage you to move forward with 
getting the new car or if you want to stick with whatever your original 


choice was. 


Perhaps you went in for a small sedan because you do not like to drive 
anything much large. However, you have two young children, and you find 
that you are always frustrated that you do not have enough room for car 
seats, a stroller, a diaper bag, and any shopping you may do during the day. 
This means that your car, despite being one that you are comfortable 
driving, is not one that you are necessarily going to be comfortable in using 


on a regular basis. 


The salesperson sees that you need some more space and recommends some 
compact SUVs to you as well. They are just big enough that they will 
actually accommodate the rest of your belongings without causing you to 
struggle to fit some groceries when you run to the store during the day as 
well. Now, to be fair, the SUV is a bit more expensive, and you know this. 
The salesperson knows this too, and you can presume that the salesperson is 
going to get a slightly larger commission on the SUV as opposed to the 


sedan. 


However, after mulling it over, you realize that the salesperson was right— 
you need the space. You need room for your children, their necessities, and 


anything that you may get when you are out, and your stroller barely fits in 


the trunk as it is without anything extra. You then decide to go with the 
SUV. 


Now, what makes this persuasion and not manipulation is the attempt to 
make sure that you know what you are doing and that the salesperson is 
genuinely trying to help you. Now, if the salesperson were simply trying to 
convince you to get the largest car on the market with the most expensive 
monthly payment, that would have been more along the lines of 
manipulation, but considering that your salesperson showed you some 
reasonable options and did not push the point, it was considered to be 


persuasive instead. 


In relationships 


You can see this sort of give and take play out in relationships, too—for 
example, imagine that you and your partner are ready to take the next step 
and move in together. However, neither of you really wants to let go of your 
apartment. Ultimately, the best way to get one of the two of you out of their 
home and into the other’s home is through persuasion—you will both have 
to come up with the reasons to stay in your own respective apartments 


while the other party moves. 


Because neither of you are attempting to underhandedly manipulate your 
way into staying in your own home and you are both willing to calmly 
consider what is going on and what the reasons for staying or going would 
be in order to rationally decide the best course of action, this is considered 


an attempt of persuasion. 


In parenting 


In parenting, the best thing that you can do is learn t0 talk to your child, so 
they understand you clearly and effectively. This means that you need to 
figure out how best to communicate with your own child, and that could 
very well be different than what you would use for someone else that you 
know or with someone else’s kid. If you can effectively learn to 
communicate with your child, you can then use persuasion on a regular 


basis. 


When you are raising a child, what you are doing is trying to figure out how 
best to help them become responsible, mature adults that are productive and 
capable of interacting with those around them. This means that they need to 
develop skills such as how to persuade someone or how best to 
communicate when they need something. This means that you should teach 
by example—you should talk to your child using the same persuasive 


patterns that you would use for a friend or family member. 


For example, if they really want a cookie and ask nicely for one, you could 
very politely say, “I am so proud of you for using your manners! But you 
know, dinner is about to be finished, and you need to make sure that you 
Save room to eat your dinner. How about we have it tomorrow after lunch 
because you don’t need sugar after dinner.” This involved you negotiating a 


new time for eating the cookie and your child agreeing. 


Now, of course, you could have simply said, “No cookie; it’s too late,” and 
had that be the end of discussion, but that would not have been doing your 


child any favors. Instead, you are making it clear that good communication 


skills are critical if they want to be successful at all. You are helping them 
become the best possible adults that they can be because you are teaching 


them skills such as persuasion early on. 


In negotiation 


Negotiation is something that only certain people will deal with on a regular 
basis, but nearly everyone will face it at one point or another. If you need to 
negotiate with someone, persuasion is the perfect way to begin attempting 
to get someone to see your own side. Effectively, you can lay out your 
argument for having things done your way, offering up your own 
concessions, and then seeing what happens next. You want your negotiation 
partner to feel willing to accept the deal that you have put out without 
feeling like they are being taken advantage of because taking advantage is 
not one of the main purposes of persuasion—being fair and forthcoming is. 
At work 


Finally, at work, you are likely to need persuasion at some point in time. Do 
you need a day off for a trip? You will have to persuade your boss that you 
need it. Do you want a raise? Why do you deserve it? How will your own 
productivity change if you get that raise in order to warrant it when you 


ask? What can you possibly do to make that raise worthwhile? 


Beyond just negotiations with employers, however, you also need to be 
prepared to negotiate with clients or business partners, and you will need 
persuasion to make you effective at those as well. Ultimately, nearly any 


time you need to ask someone to do something, you are effectively trying to 


persuade them to do something. This is exactly why persuasion is so 


incredibly important to have a solid grasp upon. 


Chapter 4: Mind Control Techniques with 


Persuasion 


Now, you have seen just how critical persuasion can be in several different 
contexts. At this point, it is time to start seeing the techniques that you can 
use to persuade other people. Remember, persuasion is all about being clear 
about what you are asking for. However, on the other hand, it is also about 
convincing people to do what you want. You need to be able to walk along 


that fine line without falling on either side if you want to be effective. 


This chapter will introduce you to both the principles of persuasion and the 
rhetoric of persuasion. You will be guided through each and every step of 
the persuasion and provided with the reasoning that you should make it a 
point to truly develop these skills. Each has its own important uses if you 


are willing to put in the effort to learn them. 


Principles of Persuasion 


First, we will discuss the principles of persuasion. These are six different 
persuasive tools that you can use in order to convince those around you to 
behave in certain ways. They can be used on their own or in tandem with 
others on this list. However, what is important is that you remember that 
these tools are useful, and you practice them whenever you get the chance. 


Authorit 


Social 
proof 


Authority 


The first of the principles of persuasion is authority. When you seek to 
appeal to authority, you are simply trying to make yourself into some sort of 
authority figure. This is for a very specific reason. 


Stop and consider for a moment—would you rather take medical advice 


from a random person walking down the road or from a doctor wearing a 


lab coat and a badge? Which would seem more convincing to you? If both 


of them held out a pill in their hand and urged you to take it, would you? 


Many people would be willing to be treated by the doctor in the coat and 
with a badge. They are deemed to be an authority on medicine just because 
they happen to be wearing a lab coat and have their credentials printed out 
on their badge. The other person, however, is some random nobody, and 
even if they were to say that they are a doctor, you would have no way of 
knowing for sure, nor would you be able to verify what was being offered 


to you to take. 


Ultimately, this is exactly the kind of divide you would see ordinarily— 
when there is an appeal made to authority, the one who is knowledgeable 
wins out. The one deemed to be more of an authority due to credentials or 


experience wins out in the end. 


This means that when you want to appeal to authority, what you need to do 
is make sure that you find a way to make it clear that you are, in fact, an 
authority on the subject. If you are the car salesperson, maybe have letters 
and pictures from your happy clients that have bought cars from you and 
left fully satisfied after your help. Maybe you should pay attention to the 
fact that when people walk in, the first thing you want them to see is that 
you are qualified at your job. You may set up so they can see your diploma 
or awards, or you will make sure that they hear about it in the first few 


minutes of the meeting. 


Commitment and consistency 


The next principle of persuasion is known as commitment and consistency. 
When you are dealing with commitment and consistency, you are 
effectively playing on the fact that people tend to like what is familiar and 
expected. This means that people will always try to continuously follow 
through on a commitment that they have made, and the more often that they 
make that particular commitment, the more likely they are to continue to 


make that commitment with it eventually just becoming standard. 


For example, say you asked your neighbor, who happens to be your 
coworker, for a ride to work. It is literally no inconvenience because you 
both travel both ways at the same time. After several drives in which your 
coworker takes you to work, it eventually becomes expected, and you no 
longer have to ask—you are simply waiting by your neighbor’s car before 
and after work each day to catch that ride. Effectively, the first time they 
agreed to take you, they locked themselves into a chain of repeatedly being 


asked by you for rides and agreeing to do so on a regular basis. 


People love to be consistent—it is valuable to be consistent, and because of 
that, people will usually continue to follow through, even if they do not like 


it and do not want to continue. 


You can trick people into doing things for you with this same process as 
well. If you want something, such as maybe wanting your coworker to 
cover a shift for you, you may start by asking a simple yes question, such as 
asking if they have had a nice week so far. Your neighbor says yes, and then 
you ask if they will trade shifts with you so you can make sure that you are 


able to go to a concert that you have been looking forward to. 


Thanks to having already begun to say yes to other things, your coworker is 
going to be in a state of mind in which he or she is already saying yes, so 
they may as well continue. After agreeing to a few smaller things as well, 
you may run into someone who is willing to accommodate more difficult or 


larger requests in the name of consistency. 


Liking 


This is perhaps one of the most straightforward of the principles of 
persuasion—all you need to remember is that the more you like someone or 
something, the more likely you are to feel like whatever you liked is 
valuable, and the more likely you are to be convinced in its favor. For 
example, you are more likely to do a favor for someone that you really like 


than someone that you do not like at all. 


Luckily, there are several ways that you can make it a point to become 
likable to someone else. You can, for example, mirror someone until they 
like you. This means that you would be copying their behaviors as covertly 
as you could possibly manage, which may not be particularly secretively if 
you do not know what you are doing. Upon setting everything up and 
mirroring the other person to the point that they mirror you back, you 


should be good to continue. 


However, if you are unsure how to proceed with mirroring or you simply do 
not want to deal with it, there are other techniques you can use as well, such 
as choosing to intentionally make someone like you. This is not nearly as 


difficult as it sounds. 


Start by making some sort of connection between yourself and the other 
party—perhaps you make it a point to comment that you can relate to the 
other person when they arrive with their child to an appointment. You tell 
them that you have a child about the same age and that going back to work 
at that age is just so difficult. 


With the connection made, you will want to make eye contact and continue 
to talk. You may offer the other party some praise or a compliment, meant 
to make them feel like you genuinely care about what they are saying or 
what they think. The catch here is that the compliment that you make has to 


be genuine, and you must mean it. 


Finally, if you want to be likable, you must make it clear that the two of you 
are on the same side. Perhaps you point out that you will both be working 
together toward getting the other person a car. Maybe you convince them 
that you will both try to solve their problem, no matter what it is, with them. 
This camaraderie set up then makes it less likely for the partners to worry 


about them. 


Create a 
sense of 
teamwork 


Make a Offer a 


Connection compliment 


Reciprocity 


The next principle of persuasion is reciprocity. When you are appealing to 
reciprocity, effectively, you are working with the attitude that you will help 
anyone that helps you first. You make it clear that you are happy to help 


them if you think that they will respond in kind. This is not nearly as 


entitled as it may seem upfront. 


Think about how, when a friend buys you a gift, you feel like you must 
reciprocate? This is intentional with human development—it is done, so 
you feel the urge to reciprocate when someone else is offering you 
something. This means that when someone else has helped you, you will be 
more inclined to help them when they need help. You effectively safeguard 
with your own altruistic behaviors to make sure that both you and the other 


party are able to receive in your times of need. 


If you want to take advantage of this, for example, you may start by 
reaching out to someone that you need help from. Maybe you want your 
neighbor to take care of your dog while you go out of town overnight. You 
then offer to do something for your neighbor. Perhaps you clean up his yard 
before asking him if he can take care of your dog for the day. You let him 
know that all he will have to do is let your dog out a couple of times, and 
things will be fine. After having been helped by you, he feels obligated to 
follow through and help you out as well. He agrees to take care of your dog 
during your trip, and that is one less thing for you to worry about over the 


next several days. 


Scarcity 


Scarcity refers to supply and demand. Effectively, the more regular or 
readily available something or someone is, the less important it is. You can 
often see this with material items—limited edition items tend to be far more 


in demand than the same item in a standard color. For example, if you really 


want that newest game console, but you want the one specific to your 
favorite game series, you are likely going to have to find it on a used sale 
site and hope that you can find it at a regular price. Otherwise, you will 
have no choice but to simply trudge on ahead without that particular 


console. 


This is because the regular console is common. It is easy to attain and 
therefore is not particularly important to you, nor is it deemed as valuable 


as the regular one to you. 


Now, you may be wondering how supply and demand can relate to 
persuading someone to do something. The answer is that you need to make 
sure that you are able to convince them that you are in demand. Perhaps you 
find that your partner seems to take you for granted. If you have a serious 
talk with your partner about how you do not feel loved or respected, and 
during that talk, you mention that you would rather be anywhere but there 


because it is so exhausting to live completely unwanted. 


This should cue to your partner that you will not always be available—you 
are only available as long as you wish to make yourself available, and that 
immediately ups your value. You can do this with other people, too. Reject 
the first attempt to schedule something with you and say that the date does 
not work for you. When you get to a date just a bit later, you can convince 
the other party that you are worth the money that will be put into you. You 
want people to feel like they got lucky to get you. After all, you are one of a 
kind—treat yourself like it. 


Social proof 


Finally, social proof refers to the tendency of people to fall for peer 
pressure. This is effectively just a fancy word for peer pressure and involves 
you actively making a point to choose to defer to what other people are 
doing. If you do not know what you should be doing, you effectively decide 
to defer to what you see around you. If you see that your peers are dancing 
in a circle, but you do not know why they are dancing in a circle, you are 
likely going to just join in without understanding why, and that is okay. You 
do it anyway and never find out why. 


When you want to use this form of persuasion effectively, you will just 
want to set up a control area. Do you remember why so many manipulators 
liked the home-court advantage? It is so they are able to manipulate their 
surroundings. You can do this, too. For example, if you want someone to do 
something for you, make sure that you ask them around other people that 
are actively doing whatever it was that you asked them to do in the first 


place. 


For example, if you want to go around and collect signatures and donations 
for a cause, you would want to be sure that those around you are actively 
seeing that you are getting what you want. When they see that other people 
are signing and donating, they are more likely to do so, especially if they 
recognize names, or they feel like they need to keep up with their peers. 
Effectively, then, this works well to keep people in line just by maintaining 


the environment around them. 


Rhetoric 


Another series of techniques that can help you become more persuasive is 
the art of rhetoric. Rhetoric is the art to speak or write persuasively in an 
attempt to get other people to see things your way. Dating way back to the 
time of Aristotle, the ancient Greek philosopher, if you are able to form 
your arguments with rhetoric, you can make sure that you are addressing 


other people in a way that is compelling and difficult to reject or ignore. 


In particular, rhetoric involves three distinct methods of persuasion—these 
are three techniques that are commonly used in order to make sure that the 
other person is likely to go along with your suggestion. These are 
commonly referred to by their Greek names of Ethos, Pathos, and Logos. 


Ethos 


Appeal to Appealto Appeal to 
character emotion logic 


Builds Builds Builds reasons 
credibility for emotions for for 
the speaker the listener compliance 


Ethos 


Ethos is an appeal to character. It focuses on making sure that the one 
presenting all of the information for the listener is viewed as credible. If the 
speaker is not credible, no one is going to believe in what he or she has to 
say, which means that his or her attempts and techniques will be particularly 


worthless. After all, you cannot clearly convince someone else to do 
something if they do not trust you. This is essentially quite similar to the 


appeal to authority in the principles of persuasion. 


Ethos primarily can be seen in advertising—when you are trying to sell 
something, you want to make sure you have someone credible be the one 
advocating for your product, and staying true to that, you often find that 
celebrities commonly are called in to promote the brands. Of course, those 
people are being paid for their time and endorsements, but the effect is 
undeniable. For example, imagine a local sports personality making it clear 
that he always drinks one particular brand of soda without fail. The next 
time that you are in the mood for soda, if you happen to be a fan of that 
particular person, you may find that you are far more likely to pick up that 
same brand of soda simply because your unconscious mind wants to 


emulate someone that you are fond of. 


This works precisely because people admire others, and when they do 
admire someone else, they want to emulate them. People naturally want to 
be like the people they look up to or admire in any way, and because of that, 
they will be more likely to make decisions based on those admired 


individuals. 


Pathos 


The next form of rhetoric that is commonly used is pathos—this is an 
appeal to emotions. This is effectively coming up with a way to establish an 
emotion in your listeners in hopes of getting them to act in a way that you 


want to see. You may make someone feel sad or guilty in order to get them 


to donate. You may try to make someone angry in order to make them act. 
You may try to make someone feel happy to encourage them to like 


whatever you are promoting. 


Ultimately, emotions are so powerful precisely because they are meant to be 
motivating. You are going to naturally feel inclined to act according to your 
emotions simply because that is why they are there. Your emotions are 
effectively your unconscious mind’s way of interacting with your body, 
creating emotional impulses that are meant to keep you alive. You may feel 
fear when you are being chased by a hungry mountain lion, or anger when 
someone threatens you—this is because your emotions are meant to help 
you survive, and when you are angry, you are more likely to stand up for 
yourself, or when you are in danger, you need to be able to act in a way that 


will keep you alive. 


By creating the necessary emotions, you can usually begin to persuade 
those around you to act; however, you want or need them to. If you need 
someone to be angry and act, you figure out the best way to instill that 
anger. If you need help, you instill a sense of obligation or guilt. If you need 


to keep someone complacent, you want them to feel content and relaxed. 


A lot of the time, people will instill these emotions through stories, quotes, 
and vivid language. For example, if you are at a fundraiser to benefit a 
children’s hospital that sees a large number of patients with cancer, you may 
be told stories of how being on that floor is a parent’s worst nightmare and 
that sometimes, what they want more than anything else is to see their 
children doing something normal—they want that sense of normalcy to 


cling to because they do not know if they will be taking their children home 


at the end of the journey, and some people know for sure that they will not 
be taking their children home. The speaker may involve photos of sick 
children and sobbing parents, all designed to make the audience sad or 
guilty, especially if they have their own children at home. In their guilt and 
sadness for those parents in the story or slideshow, more people are willing 


to donate. 


Logos 


An appeal to logic and reason is the final form of rhetoric. With Logos, you 
are seeking to establish as much reason as possible that cannot be denied to 
do whatever you are requesting. You may point out the numbers and facts 
that support what you are asking for, or otherwise use studies that support 
your opinion. Those using Logos have a tendency to throw as much data as 


possible at the other person, hoping that something will stick. 


Of the forms of persuasion, this may seem like the most valid—after all, 
how do you fake statistics and studies? However, the problem with this 


form of persuasion can arise in the fact that it is incredibly easy to 


misconstrue or misuse statistics, especially if those statistics are not being 


fact-checked, or the listener does not feel the need to question them. 


For example, consider the difference between correlation and causation— 
you can present two different statistics as correlation, but many people will 
immediately assume that there is causation, despite the fact that there may 
be none at all and the similarities in statistics may be nothing but 
coincidence .Perhaps the most easily imagined form of this is to consider 


that as the sales of ice cream increase, so does the rate of violent crime. 


To someone not familiar with statistics or correlation vs. causation, they 
may automatically assume that ice cream and crime are linked. However, 
they both are simply results of the temperature rising. Ice cream sales tend 
to go up during the hot summer months, but crime also happens to go up as 
the heat makes people’s tempers shorter than ever. They are not actually 


related at all beyond both having the same root cause. 


Chapter 5: Influencing Others with the Science of 
Persuasive Psychology 


Thus far, we have thoroughly discussed the concepts and techniques behind 
how to persuade others, but have not actually looked at the act of being 
persuasive. There is more to persuasion than just theory, and while the 
theory is important, there should also be equal, or more, consideration given 
to the methods through which you can be persuasive. These methods will 
utilize the principles of persuasion and rhetoric, but they will also serve as 
instructions on how to be persuasive in general. You cannot simply say that 
you must appeal to emotions and then leave it at that—there are other 


persuasive techniques that exist. 


We will be taking some time to look at how the one being influenced takes 
the persuasion offered. You will be seeing why and how these methods 
work and how to use them. You will be considering exactly how you can 
influence the decisions that other people make without having to coerce or 
force the other party to do what you are asking. Instead, you will be 
focusing on how best to convince them that they ought to have a certain 


mindset or make a certain decision. 


Within this chapter, you will take a look at how persuasive psychology is 
built up, specifically looking at the emotionally intelligent leader, who is 
able to gather followers with ease, and then extrapolating beyond that 
particular individual to others as well. You will see how emotional 
intelligence encourages people to become persuasive individuals that they 
are without ever having to coerce or force. After painting the background to 
what persuasive psychology utilizes, you will be guided through four 
different methods that you can use to ensure that you can persuade others to 
do as you wish. As you proceed, keep in mind that one of the most defining 
differences between persuasion and manipulation is that the one being 
persuaded can always choose not to do what is being requested. The 
persuader honors free will, and while the persuader may try to guide the 
individual toward what they want, it will never happen in a forced manner. 


Saying no to the request is still an acceptable result. 


Persuasive Psychology and Influence 


Consider, for a moment, the most influential person that you personally 
know. They may be someone that you regularly interact with—a teacher, a 
boss, or a friend. What makes them so influential? The answer may not be 
that they are smart, funny, or handsome—but rather, they are emotionally 


intelligent. 


Emotionally intelligent individuals tend to be far more likely to convince 
other people to do what they want or need simply because they know how 
to present themselves .They know how best to interact with others and are 
able to sense the best way to proceed. Interestingly enough, many of the 
actions that the emotionally intelligent individual uses to try to persuade 
others happen to line up almost perfectly with the principles of persuasion 
and with rhetoric. They know how to utilize those particular techniques 
almost instinctively, and the end result is someone who is incredibly skilled 


at persuasion. 


This also happens to lead these emotionally intelligent individuals to be the 
ones that others go to for guidance as well. If you knew that your friend 
always seemed to make the right decision, after all, you would likely go to 
them any time that you felt like you were at a crossroads and were unsure of 
what to do next. This is simply because you trust that friend’s judgment and 


know that they would not lead you astray. 


Effectively, then, your ability to be persuasive with other people will 
naturally increase simply by learning to be emotionally intelligent. That is 
perhaps the best way to naturally increase your persuasiveness without 
having to consciously think about how to persuade others. When you do 
have to think about it, however, the best way to figure out how to persuade 
someone is to figure out the best approach. 


Are you looking to lead someone to a decision that requires you to be 
authoritative? This would be if you were attempting to sell someone on 
something. Are you looking to get a friend to do a favor for you? You may 
want to use an emotional appeal to make them feel like they need to help 
someone that they care about. Do you want to make a whole crowd choose 
an action that you are attempting to push? If so, you may want to use loaded 
words and stories in an attempt to get them all motivated the same. Do you 
need a single person to do you a favor? Start by asking if you can help 
them. 


As you can see, there are several different techniques that must be used at 


any given moment to help make your message more persuasive. However, 


you must be able to figure out the best way to convince other people. You 
can simplify the act of figuring out how best to convince someone to do 
something into a few steps. First, you will start by identifying the target for 
your persuasion. Then, you must figure out the nature of the persuasion that 
you will be using—are you persuading someone as an authority that should 
be listened to or as someone that is deserving of help? Next, you must 
figure out how best to get whatever you are hoping to get, and lastly, you 
must use the methods and techniques you have decided upon. 


Identify the Identifythe Identifythe 
target of nature ofthe method of 
persuasion persuasion persuasion 


Create an Appeal to Needs 


What drives you to act in your life to survive? We are not talking about 
things that you enjoy right now, but rather, what compels you more than 
anything else? The answer to this is a need—your needs keep you 
motivated to act toward fulfilling them. You will always be motivated to 
find food when you are hungry, for example, or to find shelter when you are 
too cold. This is because you have basic human needs to meet that keep you 
alive. Your needs can vary from physical needs to keep yourself alive all the 
way to how to feel fulfilled, and ultimately, these motivators are incredibly 
compelling. 


Before delving into creating and appealing to needs, let’s stop and go over 
the basic hierarchy of needs. Take a look at the pyramid below: As you can 
see, at the base, you have the most important needs. These are the needs for 
food, water, air, shelter, warmth, and reproduction. These are the bare 
minimum needs to stay alive and to reproduce, as is the biological 
imperative. In general, you must meet the bottom three tiers of needs before 
you can begin to work on yourself. 


Self-actualization 


Love and belonging 


Physiological needs 


Each of these categories manage different sorts of needs for you, and 
ultimately, people are always striving to do better and move from one to the 
next. These categories encompass needs such as: 

e Physiological needs: The need to survive and be healthy 


physically—food, water, air, shelter, reproduction, warmth, etc. 


e Safety needs: The need to feel safe and secure, such as the need 


for steady access to resources and health 


e Love and belonging needs: The need to feel like you belong 
with others—this is friendship, intimacy, and a sense of 


connection with others 
e Esteem needs: This is a need for respect and recognition 


e Self-actualization needs: This is a need to be the best person that 


you can be 


Ultimately, people are always striving for the top—self-actualization. 
However, you cannot work toward self-actualization if you are hungry or 
unsafe. You need to secure the bottommost needs before you can work at 


the top. 


When you want to create a need that you can use, you may find that 
sometimes, identifying a previously existing need can be easier .However, 
you can also create a sense of urgency to meet one of these needs. For 
example, imagine that you are selling a car. You are really working to 
persuade someone to get a very specific car, though you know that they are 
not particularly interested in it. One way to create an appeal to a need is to 
mention that the car that the people are interested in does not have the best 


ratings in terms of safety. You point out that the car has been known to 


underperform in accidents, and that the one that you are pushing for tends 
to be safer simply because it is bigger and sturdier, or it has better safety 


ratings. 


By appealing to that need for safety, you are more likely to get them to 
agree to buy that particular car. If they are not concerned about safety, you 
can appeal to a need to belong—you can point out that other people also 
tend to prefer that one car that you would like to sell over the one they are 


interested in and provide the evidence to support that claim. 


Loaded Words 


Another commonly used method to persuade other people is through using 
loaded language. This is the act of using words or language that has very 
specific connotations in hopes of changing the way that the other person 
perceives what is being talked about. Effectively, you are using words that 


typically attract attention or are seen as particularly beneficial bonuses. 


Imagine that you are trying to sell a new baby food brand. You have worked 
hard to develop the image for the food, but you realize that people do not 
usually buy a food that they know nothing about—they tend to go with 
trusted brands that they know and can trust will be safe or deliver what they 
wanted. You may be stuck trying to figure out how best to break into the 


scene to actually get on the market and convince people to buy. 


One such method of convincing others is through using loaded words and 
images. You will want to make sure that you are constantly utilizing words 
or images that are perceived as strongly positive. For example, think about 
what it is that parents want for their newborn children. You may 
acknowledge that most parents want to ensure that their children are happy 
and healthy and that they are not exposed to chemicals or other additives 
that may make them sick or cause a reaction. After all, babies are believed 
to be incredibly fragile, and because of that, parents tend to go all-out in 


making sure that their children only have the best. 


You may, then, decide that you will be appealing to that desire for all- 
natural products. You take your advertising campaign to emphasize that you 


use natural, organic, non-GMO food products with the bare minimum 


ingredients necessary. You push that your food is healthy and simple, 
encouraging parents to be more inclined to buy simply because they know 
that they can read all of the ingredients on the label. 


Effectively then, when you want to use loaded language, you are appealing 
to emotion. You are making someone feel like they are making the right 
choice in deciding to go with whatever you are requesting that they use. 
This means that you are better able to get people to see things your way and 
better able to persuade simply because you know how to activate emotions. 
You will always choose the loaded language that will activate the feelings 


that you need present to play upon. 


Anchor Biases 


An anchor bias is a cognitive bias that ends up being incredibly influential. 
Effectively, you want to make something seem like a good idea or plan 
simply by making it seem reasonable in comparison to the anchor point. 
When you do this, you are generally setting an anchor point that you use to 
be a reference point for whatever you are trying to persuade someone else 
to do. 


This is best understood when looking at the negotiation of pay. You may be 
asking for a raise during your next review at work. Perhaps you want a 10% 
raise because of the productivity you have put in and the rate at which you 
are able to retain valuable clients. You figure out exactly why and how you 
want to argue for this particular number, but all that is left is the delivery of 
the argument. You need to present your information in a way that makes it 


seem realistic or reasonable. 


In a negotiation, it is common knowledge that you rarely ever take the first 
offer—you are usually able to counter-offer, and then meet somewhere in 
the middle. This means that if you ask for that flat 10% raise right off the 
bat, your chances of actually getting it are slim. However, if you are able to 
make an anchor point that makes that 10% raise seem reasonable, you may 


actually stand a chance. 


The best way to do this is to always ask for more. You may go in and ask 
for a 15 or 20% raise instead, knowing that the number will be cut down. 
When you ask your boss for that raise, you will likely be shot down 


immediately, followed by a counteroffer of 5-10% simply because your 


original asking price was so high. This means that the other party is going 
to feel more inclined to give what you initially wanted since it is still 


significantly less than you originally asked for. 


In the end, you get your 10% raise, all by asking for far more than you were 
actually interested in. By shooting high right away, you make anything that 


comes afterward seem reasonable. 


You see this during sales pricing as well. Several different stores have 
pricing strategies that involve marking up prices only to discount them back 
to market value. This means that you see that you are getting a 20-30% 
discount, but only because the prices were inflated 20-30% in the first 
place. At the end of the day, you are paying market value, but you feel 


better about it because the anchor point of full-price seemed like far more. 


Ask First What You Can Do for the Other Person 


Perhaps one of the simplest techniques that you can use to persuade 
someone to do something for you is to appeal to reciprocity. People 
naturally feel inclined to return favors when they have received them in the 
first place, and you can use this tendency in order to influence other people 
to do whatever it is that you want or need them to do. You may be able to 
convince someone to take a shift for you at work just by covering their 


extended lunch break, for example. 


This is a popular technique for the emotionally intelligent leaders. They 
make themselves sound entirely focused on making someone else feel 
better about doing a favor by offering to do one first. You may find that you 
have a friend that is always happy to help you or is the first to volunteer 
when you voice that you have a problem. Emotionally intelligent leaders 
make it a point to do this simply because it sets up a standard of 
camaraderie—you make it clear that you are interested in the other person 
simply by volunteering occasionally to help them out. Not everyone is 
willing to help out when asked or needed, but if you are willing to do so, 
even occasionally, other people will be more inclined to help you out when 


you need a favor. 


After having offered, you will then know that the individual that you have 
helped will be more inclined to help you in the future as well. For example, 
imagine that you know that you have a vacation coming up, and you do not 
want to board your dog. You also know that you have a friend that will be 
going on a trip just a week or so before you and your friend has cats. You 


may volunteer to go and check on the cats several times during your 


friend’s trip when your friend talks about having to look for someone to 
come in and take care of them. They will need litter cleaned a few times 
and will need daily food and water, but beyond that, they will be fine on 
their own. Your friend graciously accepts and then asks you to let her know 
if you will need any help in the near future. You reply that you actually will 
need help soon and that you need someone to take care of your dog. Your 
friend volunteers to keep the dog at her house for a few days while you are 
on your trip, and you no longer have to worry about boarding your dog 


because you know that your dog will be safe and happy with your friend. 


This technique tends to be better for those who need help from a friend or 
someone that they know personally just because it involves one-on-one 
interaction. However, you can also see this play out on a larger scale as 
well. Perhaps you are a manager, and your employees are all asking for an 
increase in pay across the board. You take it to your higher-ups, and in 
return, your employees all see that you have their back. They then make it a 
point to always help whenever they are asked to do so and they are willing 
to go above and beyond when requested. 

To take advantage of this technique, you are best served by always asking 
how you can help other people whenever it is not a strain on you or what 
you need to do. If you are able to always ask other people what they want or 
need, you can make sure that you are setting up good relationships with 
other people, and with that good relationship established, you will be far 


more able to get them to do whatever it is that you needed. 


Chapter 6: What is NLP? 


Have you ever gone through the effort of trying to communicate with 
someone else that does not speak the same language as you? Perhaps you 
speak English, and the other person speaks Chinese. The person speaking 
Chinese is desperately gesturing for something, but you are entirely unsure 
what it is that they need. They gesture frantically, but you never figure it 
out. You make many guesses—you offer a phone, and they shake their 
head. You offer water, and they shake their head. No matter what you offer, 
the other person becomes more and more annoyed or frustrated because he 
or she cannot get through to you. Eventually, the other person storms off 
without having ever gotten whatever it is that he needed and you are left 


wondering what it was that was so desperately needed in the first place. 


Now, imagine that same exchange, but you are both the English and 
Chinese speaker—one half of you only speaks in English while the other 
desperately tries to communicate in Chinese. Neither side is able to 
communicate with the other, and both end up disjointed, frustrated, and 
without any proper communication. This is actually what does happen in 
your mind. Your conscious mind thinks in one way, and the unconscious 
mind thinks entirely differently. You may want to be setting up a life to be 
happy and successful, but in reality, your unconscious has never received 
the message. As a result, you find that your unconscious continuously 
sabotages you. Your emotions do not line up with your goals. Your body 
language does not fit. You simply run into complication after complication, 


despite the fact that you know what you want. 


Keep in mind that your unconscious mind is not meant to be your 
adversary. It is not something that needs to be tamed or controlled. Rather, 
it is something to harness and work within tandem. However, this means 
that you need to learn to communicate with it appropriately. If you can 
figure out the right way to communicate with that unconscious part of 
yourself, you can get it lined up with your conscious desires and 
expectations. You can get it to help you achieve your goals. It is not a 
matter of your unconscious being out to get you or subvert your attempts to 
happiness; it is a matter of you do not know how best to communicate with 


your unconscious mind to get what you want. 


Neuro-Linguistic Programming 


This is where neuro-linguistic programming comes in. NLP is designed to 
help you facilitate getting the results that you want and need. It helps you 
figure out how best to act in ways that are conducive to your success. Those 
who practice NLP say that the unconscious mind is what drives you to 
achieve your goals, so long as you are able to communicate those goals 
effectively. NLP recognizes that both the conscious and unconscious minds 


are important and serve their own roles. 


The Unconscious The Conscious 
Mind Mind 


The goal- getter The goal-setter 


Figures out how to 

achieve goals and Decides what is 
Spurs action toward desired 
understood desires 


NLP helps to bridge that gap between the two, acting as a sort of translator, 
so your conscious desires are communicated to the unconscious mind in 
order to ensure that your mind works together rather than against each 
other. By working together, you will find that you are far more likely to see 
your desired results simply because you are not running into the problem of 
having the two parts of your mind clash. 


Effectively, neuro-linguistic processing is a method of learning to 


communicate with the unconscious. You are learning to become fluent in 


your unconscious mind’s method of communication so you can finally tell it 
what you want. It allows for that communication with yourself, but also 
facilitates the communication with others as well. This means that you can 
use the processes learned during the practice of NLP to also communicate 
with the unconscious minds of others as well. You can implant thoughts, 
facilitate behaviors, and encourage changes in lifestyles all by learning how 


to tap into the unconscious minds of others. 


While this may sound manipulative, you actually see people paying others 
to give them the NLP treatment. People will pay practitioners to help them 
overcome phobias or bad habits. People can be taught to overcome 
emotions, create new coping methods, and more all by interacting with 


someone fluent in NLP. 


For example, imagine that you have severe anxiety because, as a child, you 
went up to present something, but you really needed to use the bathroom. 
You could not go before the presentation, and as you gave it, you 
accidentally had an accident. Everyone laughed at you, and ever since, you 
have been terrified of ever getting involved in presentations. Being in front 
of a crowd became something that you could not possibly bring yourself to 
do. You failed several assignments all through school because you simply 
would refuse to present. You would do the work, but you would not go up 


to present it. 


Obviously, there are plenty of job choices during which you would never 
have to be in front of a crowd, but if you happened to choose a job that 
would regularly put you in front of people to deliver reports, you may find 


that you struggle. You know that you are not a child anymore and that 


realistically, you would not be wetting yourself again any time soon, but 


you cannot get over that feeling of being laughed at and horrified. 


As a solution, you may have spoken to an NLP practitioner. The 
practitioner would have access to several tools that could help you process 
that trauma in order to get past it. You could reframe the situation, learning 
to laugh at it instead of feeling traumatized. You could learn to create 
anchors that will have you begin to feel an entirely different feeling when 
you go up to present. No matter the method, there are several tools that can 


be used to help you get over that trauma. 


This is just one example of a time that NLP can be used to benefit. 
However, it can also be used in ways that are harmful. Manipulators love 
the tools of NLP because they grant access to the unconscious mind. The 
manipulator can use NLP techniques to create tendencies to obey almost 
mindlessly. They can create tendencies to give the manipulator exactly what 
he or she wants. The manipulator will be able to communicate with the 
unconscious mind without ever tripping the alarms of the conscious mind. 
Effectively, the manipulator is able to completely bypass the conscious and 
tell the unconscious exactly what is expected—and the unconscious will 
comply. Without any clear way to communicate, the individual will be left 
frustrated, wondering why they keep behaving the way that they are with no 


clear answer. 


The Keys to NLP 


For NLP to be effective, there are a few steps that need to be followed. 
These are the keys to NLP that will help you figure out how to access the 
mind. At this point, you are being shown a brief overview of what needs to 
happen. There are techniques that will more or less use these steps on their 
own and other steps that will seek to change things up a bit. However, at the 
heart of things, these must happen. These three steps, the keys to being able 
to practice NLP, are being able to examine and identify beliefs, choosing an 


appropriate anchor, and then setting that anchor in an efficient manner. 


Set the 
anchor 


If you can master these three simple steps, you will find that the more 


Identify and 
examine 
beliefs 


Choose an 
anchor 


specific techniques seem to fall into place with ease. You will be able to 
convince people to do almost anything, simply by knowing how to get into 
the other person’s mind. This is a strategic endeavor, but once you are able 
to follow that strategy, you will find that the control that you can exert over 
both yourself and others around you is far more than you had access to ever 
before. You will become the master over your own behavior, while also 
having the power and access to other people to be a master over them as 
well. You can effectively use these NLP techniques and strategies to figure 


out how best to win the long game. 


Examine beliefs 


First, you are figuring out the information at hand. This is where you start 
to piece together what you or the other person think or feel surrounding a 
certain event or situation. You may find that the other person is highly 
anxious about socializing and being in front of crowds. When in front of a 
crowd, they tend to melt down and freak out. You know this and 
acknowledge it. 


You will be examining beliefs to figure out why that is felt. In this case, it 
may link back to that one incident of wetting herself in front of a crowd and 
then being mortified any time she is under public scrutiny. 


If you are attempting to use NLP on yourself, which is a valid technique 
that many people will use, you may take this time to identify the emotion 
that you have that you wish was not problematic. You may figure out that 
you tend to feel angry during certain situations, and because of that anger, 
you struggle to really communicate with other people effectively. That lack 


of communication usually has the unfortunate result of causing problems in 


your relationships. 


As you identify those feelings, you will find that you can figure out where 
the problem lies. In figuring them out, you can start to figure out how best 
to target and destroy them. In NLP, this process usually involves the use of 
anchors—points that are directly related to a certain event or feeling. An 
anchor for your stress, for example, maybe you bite your nails out of habit, 
but after a lifetime of biting your nails when stress, just the act of absently 


biting your nails can make your anxiety begin to flare up. 


Choose an anchor 


Knowing that you will be under the influence of several anchors already, 
certain situations or actions that cause you to feel a certain emotion, it is 
time to figure out which anchors and emotions you can use to overcome the 
problem. If you know that you have an anger issue, you may go through the 
effort of learning how to combat that anger issue through triggering new 
emotions instead. Whenever you would feel yourself getting angry, then 
you would make sure that you trigger your anchor, and that would then 


cause you to feel something else. 


Effectively, if you are familiar with basic psychology, you are conditioning 
yourself. You are effectively training yourself to act a certain way in 
response to certain situations, and in doing so, you are able to make sure 
that you can overcome the negative feelings that have been holding you 
down. If you have bad habits in relation to your emotions, you can begin to 


counter them. You can figure out how to create new, healthier habits that 


trigger you to behave in new, healthier ways. You can figure out how best to 
protect yourself from your negative emotions so you can heal and move on 


in life. 


Your new anchor can be just about anything. You could use an affirmation 
or word that you repeat to yourself to help keep yourself under control. It 
could be a movement or an action that you use to remind yourself to stay 
under control, such as snapping your wrist with a rubber band whenever 
you find that your anger is getting out of hand. It could be a scent that 
makes you feel secure. It can even be a certain thought or memory that you 


return to during times of distress. 


When you choose an anchor, you want to make sure that it is something that 
you can regularly access for maximum impact. You may be best served with 
a short phrase that you use or a motion of your hands. That is something 


that you can do subtly and at any point in time. 


Set an anchor 


Finally, you must figure out how to set your anchor. This is where you see 
the most deviation in your behaviors and techniques. There are several 
different methods that can be used in order to set a good anchor point for 
you or for those around you, and how you decide to do so will largely be 
dependent upon what you are hoping to do and how you are dealing with. 
You may choose to use visualization if you are working with someone 
intentionally, with the other person knowing what you are doing. You may 
choose to use something more along the lines of mirroring and subtle 


mimicry and emotional triggers if you want to be entirely unnoticed. You 


may choose to do something like intentionally reframing a memory from 
negative and traumatic into something funny if you want to change your 
own way of thinking and your own emotional reaction. Ultimately, the 
method that you choose will largely be subject to who you are attempting to 


persuade and how you want to go about it. 


If you want to make it a point to, for example, persuade a stranger to buy 
something that you want them to, you may make it a point to trigger a 
mirroring relationship—do not worry if you do not know how to do this. It 
will be discussed in Chapter 8. From there, you can subtly influence him to 
nod his head by nodding your own head, making the other person’s mindset 
far more likely to be agreeable, and leading to the other person being 
influenced to nod along with you without ever realizing that you had 


influenced and encouraged that decision. 


Whether you want to control yourself or someone else, you always want to 
choose an anchor that is simple and easily implemented, but not so common 
that it will be randomly triggered by strangers during the course of the day. 
While you probably could trigger someone to make a certain face every 
time you do a very specific and common movement, such as giving a 
thumbs up, it would not be particularly kind or ethical to do so. You would 
be triggering the other person in a way that will likely be distracting and 
problematic. After all, no one wants to be grimaced at every time they give 
a thumbs up to someone else. 


The History of NLP 


NLP, like nearly any psychological technique, has changed drastically from 
creation to what you now know and see today. While the root is still the 
same, there are different ways that the thoughts and techniques are 
approached now compared to what was seen back when it was first founded 
in the 1970s. This chapter will provide you with a brief overview of how 
NLP has changed and what you can expect if you were to use NLP today. 
Ultimately, you can think of NLP as what it was during creation and within 


the four waves of NLP. 
The Creation of NLP 


Created in 1972 by two psychotherapists named Richard Bandler and John 
Grinder, this process was originally designed to model several other 
therapeutic processes at the time. In particular, it referenced and developed 
from techniques such as gestalt therapy, hypnotherapy, and systemic family 
therapy. All of these came together to create an approach that would address 
two specific things: Why are psychotherapists special or skilled in 
influencing others? How can that specialty be transferred to other normal 


people without any formal training in psychology? 


These two thoughts then triggered the beginning of the development of 
NLP. IN particular, people were taught to look at each of the 
aforementioned psychotherapy processes. Bandler and Grinder drew from 
those different forms of psychotherapy and pulled out any processes or 
techniques that they thought were critical in making the therapist so 


powerful. They identified the patters in communication and attitudes and 


were able to then create and build a list of techniques and beliefs drawing 
from those forms of psychotherapy. Thus, NLP was born. 

NLP as primarily existed within four specific waves, during which different 
aspects were focused on or developed. These four waves are important to 
understand in order to truly understand what NLP was and what it has 


become. 


e Wave 1: NLPure: In the first wave of NLP, you see the original 
NLP as developed by Bandler and Grinder. This is the purest 
form, during which success and enthusiasm were the most 


important factors that were pushed. 


e Wave 2: NLPt: In the second wave, you see NLP used as an 
application in psychotherapy. It is commonly referred to as neuro- 
linguistic psychotherapy, and it began in 1989. This was all about 
making sure that people had a healthy and happy approach and 


view of life. 


e Wave 3: NLPeace: This third wave, NLPeace, arose in 1992, 
with a focus on spirituality. Instead of focusing on how to fix the 
mind itself, it was focusing on how to find meaning in life and 


figure out how to connect spiritually. 


e Wave 4: NLPsy: Finally, the fourth wave encompasses the use of 
neuro-linguistic processing as a form of psychology. Beginning in 
2006, this was used to being to identify psychological patterns. It 
requires a master’s degree in psychology, for a qualification to 
practice psychotherapy, and also an NLP master training 
qualification. Effectively, when you see someone that practices 


NLPsy, you know that they have gone through years of schooling 


in order to be as effective as possible when it comes to offering 


treatment. 


When you seek out NLP treatment from a professional, you will likely face 
someone that is trained in fourth wave NLP. This is good—they are licensed 
to help you and can enable you to be the healthiest you that you can be. 
However, remember that NLP itself was designed to be accessible even to 
the average person. While you are not qualified to diagnose people if you 
have not gone to school to become licensed to do so, you will still be able to 
develop an affinity for several NLP processes so you can use them 
effectively and in ways that you know are beneficial to others around you or 
to yourself. 


Chapter 7: NLP Basic Principles to Improve Life 


Before really delving into the processes of NLP and how you can utilize 
them, it is important to recognize that there are several principles that you 
will have to keep in mind. When you want to use NLP, you must meet these 
principles if you want to be able to be successful. After all, accessing other 
people’s unconscious minds will require you to be patient, flexible, and 
willing to spend the time to do so effectively. You will need to have a clear 
plan ready for yourself so you can actively address and live by the rules that 


you are seeking to make use of. 


Think of these as your guiding processes that will help you to make sure 
that you are able to use NLP. These will be your founding principles that 
you will live by if you want to be able to tap into the unconscious. These 
will guide you in being successful, whether you want to improve your own 
life or convince someone else to do something specific. No matter what you 


choose to do, you will be able to do so, if you keep these steps in mind. 


In particular, the steps that will be addressed here are being able to know 
your outcome, take action, maintain sensory acuity, have flexibility, and live 
by a physiology of excellence. With these five principles, NLP will be 
successful for you. This chapter will guide you through learning how to 
utilize these principles in your own life. You will be able to help yourself. 
You will be able to help others. Above all, you will be able to be effective 


and successful. 


Know your outcome 


The first and most important place to start when you are attempting to live 
with the utilization of NLP is knowing your outcome. This is effectively 
figuring out exactly what you want, how you will get it, and why you want 
it. If you do not know what the outcome you want is, how can you possibly 
hope to ever achieve it? If you do not know that you want to be a lawyer, 
for example, can you possibly reasonably expect yourself to go through law 
school and build up all that debt, only to find out after the fact that law was 
your passion after all? No—no one in their right mind would ever put 
themselves through law school without ever knowing that they wanted to be 
a lawyer or that their true goal in life was to be a lawyer. People may go 
through law school because they have been told their whole life that they 
should go to law school, but even those people grew up with the 
expectation of being a lawyer. No one goes to law school without the 


expectation or desire to become that person. 


Just like no one would ever expect that you must know your own outcome 
and desires if you want to succeed. You need to figure out exactly what you 
want in life so you can figure out how to get it. Do you want to be rich? Do 
you want to find love? Maybe you want to be a parent, or you want to 
become a firefighter. No matter what the dream is, you need to know and 
vocalize it to yourself if you want it to become a reality. If you want to be 
rich, you can tell yourself that. If you want to be happy, you can tell 
yourself that, too. What your goal is in life is not as important as knowing 
what that goal is. That knowledge is power and will help you during your 


process. 


If you are using NLP for other people, you may want to know what your 
end goal for that person is. Do you want them to be happy? Do you want 
them to buy that car you are selling? Maybe you want them to break up 
with their narcissistic partner. No matter what it is you want, you need to 


know what it is if you hope to make it happen. 


Once you know what you want, it is time to form it in a way that you can 
act upon it. This is effectively just coming up with a way to structure your 
desires so you can act upon them. When you do this, you must meet certain 
specific criteria to ensure that the outcome is well-formed. This is a fancy 
way of saying that if you want your goal to be actionable and attainable, 
you need to word it in the proper manner. These criteria are critical to 


making sure that you are able to act accordingly. These criteria are: 


e Positive-oriented: Your goal must be focused on what you do 
want, not what you would like to avoid. For example, you must 
state that you want to find love, versus you don’t want to be alone 
any longer. Shifting this to a positive instead of a negative gives 


you something to work toward instead of something to avoid. 


e Sensory specific: As we continue along the NLP path, you will 
begin to see that every method of influence on someone else, 
whether it is on yourself or on someone else, is sensory. You must 
figure out which senses you will be targeting and how those 
senses will perceive when you have been successful at achieving 
your goal. Perhaps this will be that you can see that you have a 
partner if your end goal is to find love. If you want to sell that car, 
perhaps you decide that the sensory input will be having the 


paperwork with the signatures in your hand. Try to address how 


each of your five senses will interact with the outcome when it 
has been achieved. This helps you be able to truly visualize what 


you want. 


Contextual: This involves making sure that you know the 
context under which you will be successful. You are 
acknowledging what has to happen if you want to be successful. 
Where will it happen? When? How? Who will you be with? 
When you know the context of what you are seeking, you will be 
able to acknowledge what you need to do to set up the 
environment properly to ensure that you do happen to get 


whatever you are hoping to achieve. 


Self-achievable: You must make sure that the goal you want is 
one that you can set into action on your own without the influence 
of other people. You may need to make sure that other people are 
doing something, but can you do so? You must have access to the 


resources that you will need to achieve your goal. 


Ecological: This is as simple as asking three specific questions 
for yourself: Is it good for you? Is it good for other people? Is it 
for the greater good? Remember, NLP is all about bettering the 
world and those who are using it. While it is often used as a tool 
for manipulation and controlling others, that is not always the 


intention. 


Worthwhile: Finally, you must make sure that whatever the 
outcome that you are trying to achieve is worthwhile. Is it 
something that will actually be useful and positive to you? It does 


not have to be useful on a daily basis, but you should be able to 


see some good from whatever it is. You may have enhanced other 
people’s lives, allowing your friend to no longer be terrified of 
crowds, which indirectly improves your own life because your 
friend is happier and healthier. On the other hand, you may 
directly address a problem of your own in an attempt to better 
yourself, and that is okay too. So long as it is effective, either 


directly or indirectly, it is good enough. 


Take action 


The next step to making sure that you are able to be successful in using 
NLP is to take action. This is something that may seem like common sense, 
but many people entirely miss this step altogether. You must be willing to 
act if you hope to see any results. If you want to ensure that you can 
actually change your life or change the behaviors of someone else, you 


must figure out reasons to work or do something. 


Oftentimes, people fall into the trap Of inaction—they feel like they cannot 
possibly succeed, and therefore they fall victim to procrastination. 
However, this is your mind’s attempt to avoid action in order to protect 
yourself from failure. When you protect yourself in this way, it is easy to 
make excuses and act like it happened for a reason- you may tell yourself 
that you are too dumb to really make a difference, or that you will fail even 


if you try. 


Well, guess what: Failure happens. People fail all the time, but that is not 
inherently bad. When you fail, you learn. When you learn, you become 
better prepared for your next attempt. It is okay to fail, so long as you learn 
from that failure and do not let it define you. Effectively, then, you want to 
live through learning from that failure and not letting the fear of failure 


keep you locked in inaction. 


When you are practicing NLP, you must act. If you refuse to act, nothing 
gets done. Nothing changes. People’s behaviors remain the same. You fail. 
NLP is not passive—it requires constant action and effort, and for that 
reason, you must be willing to go through the motions and make whatever it 


is that you want happen. 


Sensory acuity 


Next, you must learn sensory acuity. This is effectively learning to cue into 
all of the important body language that you will need to understand if you 
hope to be able to use NLP. NLP is all about being able to look at someone 
else, understand their mindset and processes, and then use those processes 


in order to figure out how to influence the other person’s mind as well. 


Stop and consider for a moment what body language is—it is unconscious 
movements that are designed to convey very specific meanings. Your 
unconscious mind is largely responsible for your body language—if you are 
anxious, your body language will convey that. If you are happy, your body 
language will convey that. This means that if you learn how to read the 
body language of someone else, you will be able to read the state of their 


unconscious mind. 


This is because body language and actions are directly influenced by 
thoughts. They exist within a cycle—thoughts influence feelings and those 
feelings influence behavior. Effectively, then, you can learn to track the 
thoughts by learning to identify behavior. You can also take this one step 


further by learning to change thoughts by influencing behavior as well. 


Thoughts 


<= 


Effectively, then, sensory acuity is the ability to focus entirely externally. 
Think about what happens most of the time when someone is telling you a 
story. If you are not trained in effective listening, you may make it a point 
to constantly be coming up with arguments that you can use to make a 
certain point in response. You may feel like you are listening, but in reality, 
your mind is also busy trying to come up with some sort of reaction or 
counterargument. This is problematic—you are not paying close enough 
attention to the other party, and you run some serious risks in doing so. 
However, you can learn to defeat this. You can learn to focus entirely on 


listening instead. 


When you focus on sensory acuity, focusing on what the other person is 
doing as they talk, you are paying complete attention. You see all of those 
minute shifts in body language. You are seeing the other person change up 
what they are doing in response to you. You are seeing those subtle signs 
that may betray a lie, or that say that the other person is uncomfortable with 
the line of questioning but is desperate to try to remain open in 


communication. 


Effectively, then, you must learn to always listen attentively. You must learn 
how to recognize these aspects of body language so you can use them as 
feedback for yourself. In learning to recognize that body language, you can 
effectively allow yourself to respond appropriately, or to glean all of that 
information that you will need in order to be successful with the attempts to 
persuade with NLP. 


Behavioral Flexibility 


Another important aspect of NLP is flexibility. NLP is not an exact science 
simply because no two people are the same. People are complex, and so too 
are their minds. One person may be entirely comfortable with talking about 
a personal issue while the other is terrified to mention similar issues. You 
may find that some people are happy to comply without resistance, and 
others are completely unresponsive to your best attempts to influence. 
Because no two minds are the same, you must be willing to engage in a 
little trial and error. You cannot simply decide that you will come up with a 
one size fits all approach to accessing other people’s minds—you must be 
willing to entertain several different possibilities and to change things up 


when you hit a roadblock. 


Oftentimes, people fail at this—they simply stubbornly refuse to ever 
engage in anything other than what they have originally set out to do, but 
the results never change. If it failed the first and second time, why do you 
think that the same attempt would pass the next time? If you never try 
anything different, the change will never arrive. You need to be able to 
focus on change if you want to be successful at NLP. You need to be 
flexible in your own behaviors. You need to be flexible in what you are 


willing to try. 


This helps beyond just learning NLP, too—when you use this, you are 
effectively making yourself more flexible in general. You are teaching 
yourself to cope with failure or the unexpected with ease. You will no 
longer be afraid of failing or feeling like you cannot try anything else. It 


helps you become more likely to succeed simply because you are willing to 


step out of your comfort zone and mix things up when you need to. If you 
are unwilling to make concessions or change your best attempts at dealing 
with a situation, all you are going to do is keep yourself stubbornly rooted 
in failure and control rather than looking at things as being a chance for 


improvement. 


Physiology of excellence 


Finally, if you want to be successful in your endeavors with NLP, you must 
be able to operate from a position of health. You need to be feeling 
physically and mentally sound if you hope to operate at your best, which 
means that you must be able to take care of yourself. You cannot take care 
of others if you cannot take care of yourself, so you must be willing to 


maintain that physiology of excellence. 


Just as you are told that you must put your own oxygen mask on before 
tending to your children on an airplane, you must be willing to take care of 
yourself before you are willing to take on the world’s problems. You need 
to ensure that you are healthy. This means that you must engage in self- 
care. You must make sure that you are healthy. You must make sure that 


you get the proper rest to maintain yourself. 


In particular, if you find that your life is not giving you the excellence that 
you need or that you are not as healthy as you could be, you should put in 
the time to achieve it. You may need to use some of your own NLP 
techniques to achieve this, such as teaching yourself to be more diligent 


about your own sleep or exercise regimen or reminding yourself to eat 


healthily. However, you owe it to yourself and to those around you that are 
relying on you to keep yourself healthy. After all, you cannot possibly focus 


on the other person if you are not feeling well. 


Besides just being in your own best interest, if you are able to make sure 
that you are healthy, you will rub off on those that you are with. If you 
adopt your own healthy lifestyle, those closest to you are more likely to 


begin to adapt some of those tendencies for themselves as well. 


Chapter 8: Mind Control with NLP 


With that understanding of what NLP is and how it can influence you, it is 
time to begin understanding some of the most common techniques that you 
can use to control the minds of others. You may choose to control your own 
mind, influencing your unconscious to behave accordingly to ensure that 
you can get what you need, or you may be influencing other people to help 
them instead. No matter who you are attempting to influence, you will be 
able to do so with these techniques. Keep in mind that some of these may 
require tweaking between using it for yourself and using it for someone 


else. 


As you read through this chapter, you will be introduced to NLP and mind 
control—you will understand why it works at all. You will be shown how 
NLP works in order to help control other people. From there, you will then 
begin to learn how to exact that control over other people as well. You will 
be guided through four distinct tactics that you can use that wield NLP as a 
tool in order to influence others. As always, remember that NLP is one of 
those tools whose value and intent chan entirely change the meaning. If you 
use NLP from a position of wanting to help others, it is incredibly effective. 
However, if you want to use it in order to manipulate or hurt others, you 
will find that you can do far more harm than you may have realized. Keep 
in mind that playing inside someone else’s mind, no matter what your 
intention, is something dangerous. It is not something to take lightly or 
simply do to mess with someone. You should be very deliberate in your acts 
of controlling others. Free will and someone else’s mind are very personal 


and private, and that privacy deserves to be respected. 


NLP to Control Minds 


Ultimately, NLP is one of the most effective ways to influence someone 
else's mind. While you will not be able to simply tell someone to do 
something and get them to do just that or to use someone else’s mind with 
your own controller to gain absolute control, you are able to heavily 
influence what someone is willing to do or what they are willing to say or 
put up with, all by learning to access their minds and prime them to do what 
you want. You will effectively be able to plant thoughts into their minds, 
having them fit perfectly and neatly as if they were always intended to be 


there. 


a 


Effectively, then, this is an incredibly powerful influence—it will enable 
you to get other people to do almost anything that you want them to do if 
you know what you are doing. You can dispel anxiety, or you can use it to 
instill fear for a tighter grip over someone. You can use it to free someone 
from stress or to make them feel entirely powerless. This is because you are 


accessing the unconscious mind. 


NLP is effectively a form of hypnosis—you are gently and covertly lulling 
the other person into a state of suggestiveness, during which you can bypass 
the conscious mind in order to install your own desires into someone else. 


You can make sure that the other person is willing to think or feel whatever 


it is that you want them to do just by making sure that you know what you 
are doing. In fact, people have used these techniques to convince people to 
do nearly anything. All you need to be able to do is lull them into a state of 


relaxation and trust. 


In fact, one of the most important parts of being able to install a sense of 
trust in you. This is known as establishing a rapport with the other person, 
and if you can do that, you can effectively gain access to the other person’s 
mind. Ultimately, when someone trusts you, they will not be actively 
guarding against you or what you might do. This is why developing that 


rapport is so critical in NLP. 


When someone practices NLP, they usually spend a period of time building 
up that rapport so they will be able to tap into the other person’s 
unconscious mind. You will be able to do this yourself if you are willing to 


put in the effort. 


Mirroring 


First and foremost, you must build up rapport, as mentioned. The best way 
to do so is through learning to mirror someone. Mirroring is the 
unconscious mimicking of people that we are close to. Think about how, 
when one person yawns, their friends or family member that are present are 
likely to yawn as well—that is a form of mirroring. However, it does not 
stop there. When two people are close to each other emotionally and truly 
trust each other, you will find that their breathing rates will synchronize. 
They will walk together with the same steps and pacing. They will naturally 
take sips at the same time, or take bites at the same time if they are eating 
together. They will make the same motions as one another—if one itches 
their nose, the other will likely itch theirs as well. They may even take the 


same poses as each other without thinking about it. 


This is mirroring, and it is incredibly telling. When someone is mirroring 
someone else, it is because they are able to recognize that they like or trust 
that other person—that rapport has been built up and is being honored. If 


you mirror someone else around you, you are likely to do so because you 


feel like you can trust them. However, this can take a lot of time to build up 
naturally. Unless you have happened to have an instant connection with the 
other person, you are likely to need to go through the process of building it 


yourself. You can do this with just a few simple steps. 


Create a Follow Find the 
connection verbal cues punctuator 


First, you must build up a connection with the other person. You can do this 
by making sure that you are looking directly at them—you want to be 
making eye contact and directly acknowledging the other person. You may 
make it a point to pick up on their own subtle cues—try to synchronize your 
breathing with the other person as well. As you listen to them, you want to 
make it a point to nod your head regularly—in particular, you want to do 
the triple nod. The triple nod tells the other person three things: You are 
listening, you understand, and most importantly, you agree. You should feel 


the relationship build up naturally at this point. 


Next, you want to pick up on the other person’s verbal cues. While you 
could begin by mimicking their body language, that tends to ring more 
alarm bells than simply picking up on speech patterns. You will want to 
make sure that you are talking at the same pitch as the other person and 
actively following their pace and enthusiasm. As you do so, you will find 
that the other person will continue longer, especially if you acknowledge 


them with the triple nod. 


Finally, the last step in developing that mirroring connection is through 
finding their punctuator. Everyone has one—it may be as simple as a 


waggle of the eyebrows when you want to emphasize something. It may be 


more complex, such as pumping a fist in the air or tilting the head and 
smiling when you say something that you want emphasized. Nevertheless, 
identifying this will require some active work on your end. You must be 
willing to put in the effort to watch the other person’s reactions and 
tendencies in order to figure out what their own punctuator is. You want to 


know what they do so you can mimic it yourself. 


When you figure out their punctuator, you want to use it back the next time 
you feel like they are likely to use it. If you feel like they are gearing up to 
waggle their brows at you, do it first. They may not notice it, but they likely 
will smile and continue to engage with you. They will feel an instant 


connection to you without truly understanding why, and that is okay. 


Now, all you need to do is test the connection. You can do this simply by 
brushing your own shoulder or actively doing something else in an attempt 
to see if they are willing to copy you. You want to make sure that whatever 
you choose to do is relatively subtle and that it will not seem out of place, 
but it also has to be something that you think would not be coincidental. If 
they follow along, you know that you have done your job well, and you can 
move on. If not, go back to the beginning and try again. Sometimes, it takes 


a while to really convince someone to trust you. 


Anchoring 


Once you have built a connection with someone else, you are ready to move 
on to actually attempting to alter the mind of someone else. One of the best 
ways to do this is through anchoring—when you are anchoring someone to 
something, you are setting them up to have a specific reaction to a very 
specific stimulus. This may be that you want them to actively change their 
mood when you do something, or you want to figure out a way to make 
them do something in particular in response to their own anxiety or 
negative feeling. You can use this to make someone more likely to choose a 
positive decision when they feel out of control, or you can do so in order to 


get them to do something specific for you. 


A common tactic of manipulators, for example, is to create a trigger to fear 
from a very small anchor that is unnoticeable to most—they may use a 
slight but distinct movement of the hand in order to make the other person 
feel fear in order to keep the other person under control. However, it can 
also be sued to prevent bad habits, such as smoking or drinking, or to be a 


way to cope with anxiety at the moment. 


Anchoring is quite simple once you are able to develop a rapport with 
someone else. All you need to do is figure out the right steps and the right 
feelings to anchor. There are five simple steps to getting someone else 
anchored to a feeling. Keep in mind that these will take time—you cannot 
simply expect someone to randomly anchor without much effort. You are 
effectively conditioning someone, likely without them even being aware of 
it, and that takes effort and energy to remain undetected. Without further 


ado, let’s take a look at the five steps of anchoring someone else. 


ZED E29 XD AD TED 


Step 1: Choose a feeling 


You will start this process by figuring out what feeling you wish to instill in 
someone else. For the purpose of this process, let’s say you want to make 
your partner feel more confident, so she is not afraid to ask for what she 
needs when she needs it. You know that she struggles with this and you 
want to change it. Of course, this feeling could be anything. You could 
choose to instill anxiety or relaxation. You could choose happiness or 
sadness. Ultimately, you need to find a trigger that works for you and your 


situation. 
Step 2: Choose a trigger 


This is a fancy way of telling you to figure out a way to install that 
particular feeling to the other person. You may use storytelling for someone 
else, telling them a time that brings back feelings of that particular feeling 
that you want to install. If you want your partner to feel confident, you may 
reminisce over a period of time during which she was quite confident, 


describing it until you can see that she seems to be reliving that feeling. 


Step 3: Choose an anchor 


Next, you must identify the anchor that you will use. This can use touch, 


sight, smell, taste, or sound. Most often, sight is the easiest one to instill in 


someone else, but it still requires enough proximity that you can trigger it 
when you need it. Figure out what works best for you and the other person. 
Perhaps, in this case, you choose that you will use a touch to one specific 
point inside the wrist that is not commonly touched. 

Step 4: Trigger the feeling 


At this point, you will be actively triggering the feeling that you are 
anchoring. You may tell the story during which your partner was confident. 
You may say things that will help boost your partner’s confidence, such as 
offering lavish praise for the dinner that was prepared, or pointing out how 
beautiful she looks that day. You want her to feel confident, so you can then 
link it to the anchor. You may make it a point to do this several different 


ways several different times throughout the day. 


Step 5: Link the anchor 


Finally, when you can see that the other person is feeling the emotion that 
you are trying to anchor, you can begin to use the anchor that you want. If 
you have chosen that quick touch to the inside of your partner’s wrist, you 
will touch it then. If you have chosen a facial expression, you may make it. 
As you do this, over time, you will find that your partner makes an 
association between her confidence and whatever it is that you are 


anchoring. 


The trick here is to make sure that any time you trigger that feeling for her, 
you must pair it with the anchor as well. This is critical if you want it to 
truly be effective. Keep in mind that this will take time, but it will also be 


incredibly effective. 


Pacing and Leading 


Commonly used in NLP is the act of pacing and leading. Effectively, this is 
the ability to figure out how best to identify with the other person (such as 
mirroring to get on the same page) and then guiding them into your own 


mindset instead of allowing them to maintain their own. 


As you read this, going over the words written here for you, you may find 
that you are growing curious about what pacing and leading is and how it 
can be used. 

If you now feel curious about pacing and leading, then you have just fallen 
for it—your current state was acknowledged, and then you were gently 
guided to a different state—curiosity. This is an incredibly effective 
technique for one specific reason: You start by mentioning something that is 
true, acknowledging the state of someone else before actively mentioning 
something else. It effectively disarms the conscious mind immediately after 
telling the truth—the conscious no longer sees what is about to be said as 


potentially threatening because the first part was not. 


Sometimes, this can be quite overt, as it was in that first reaction, but you 


can also see it happen far subtler as well. As long as you are able to match 


the pace and then lead, you will find that this technique can be successful. 
Of course, you must have that initial rapport built up—if you do not already 
have a rapport with whomever you are attempting to pace, start with 


mirroring and then move on to this technique. 


Change that 

t he 

Establish rapport heal aie pace to lead the 
p P other person 


Consider for a moment that you are in an argument with your spouse. Your 
spouse is getting quite angry, and his voice is rising. You are also quite 
angry but you do not want it to escalate any further. In this instance then, 
you may make it a point to match the other person’s pace. This does not 
mean that you should start yelling at your spouse. You need to find another 
way to match pace. Instead of also yelling out your frustrations, perhaps 
you return that same pitch and intensity with something slightly less 
serious. You yell back that you are hungry instead of yelling back that you 
are angry. Maybe you even mix it up and yell that you are hangry instead. 
You then start to gradually lessen your own intensity, taking them and their 
own intensity with you. The sudden change in pace may initially shock your 
spouse, but you should find that your spouse will follow along with your 
de-escalation most of the time. 

This can be incredibly useful in many different settings—you may use it in 
a business setting, listening to what your client has to say, matching pace, 
and then leading into what you would like to discuss instead. You can use 
this in advertising, acknowledging what people are doing, and then 
directing them to ordering the product. You can even use it to gain interest 


in something, as was done at the beginning of this section. 


Learning to Read Body Language 


Finally, one last technique that is regularly used in NLP is to learn how to 
read and wield body language. Spending the time to understand nonverbal 
communication means that you will be able to better read what other people 
are intending. In understanding the intents of other people, you will find 


that you can also influence and control situations far better as well. 


When you are able to read body language, you develop the ability to 
understand what they are thinking. However, when you learn to wield your 
own body language, you can begin to figure out how best to interact with 


other people in order to subtly change their own feelings. 


Think back to mirroring—the other person is likely to follow your lead 
when you are able to create that connection with them. What if you were to 
begin to use your own nonverbal cues to help calm them down or change 
their mindset during that? Maybe you are talking to someone who seems 
hesitant to make a purchase—you can mirror the other person and subtly 
nod your head in order to gently push them toward wanting to agree. You 
can use this to sort of push people into making their final decision. If the 
other person is still floundering about the idea after you have already 
attempted to push for a yes, you should probably accept that no and move 


on. 


You can use this in several other ways as well. If someone seems annoyed, 
you can mirror them to get your own rapport with the other person and then 
use body language to begin to calm them down as well. This is effectively 


an entirely physical version of the pace and lead, but it can be incredibly 


effective if you know what you are doing and make it a point to use it well. 
All you need to do is go through the process, and you will find that you can 


constantly influence even minor feelings. 


Chapter 9: Improving Communication Skills 


Considering just how social that NLP comes across with how much you 
must be able to interact with the minds of others, it should come as no 
surprise that good communication skills are critical if you want to be able to 
use it. These can be difficult to develop if you do not know what you are 
doing, but you can learn how best to develop the skills that will serve you 
well if you are willing to put in the effort. In particular, communication 
skills that are strong can provide you with a myriad of benefits, both within 
NLP and persuasion and just in your general life. You will be able to 
communicate with others to be understood better, meaning that you will not 
run into conflict as much. You will be able to cope with struggles that you 
may run into. You will be able to ask for what you need. You will be able to 
better communicate with the unconscious minds of those around you. All 
you need to do is develop the right skills to do so. It will up your own 
confidence, and with that improved confidence, you will find that you are 


much more likely to be happy in your life. 


In particular, when you need to develop solid communication skills, the best 
ones to learn are to be able to make meaningful eye contact without forcing 
or faking it, being able to present yourself as confident and in control, and 
being able to listen effectively. These, in particular, will help you become 
far better at being able to communicate in a way that not only facilitates 
your own understanding of what others want to convey to you but also to 
make sure that you can tell other people what you need in a clear and 
meaningful way. Effectively, you will be able to ensure that those around 


you understand you and are able to respect what you want and need. 


This chapter will provide you with the necessary information to address 
those three specific techniques referenced above, providing you with the 
steps to make these habitual, even if you find that you are intimidated by 
the idea of making eye contact or trying to be confident. Just keep in mind, 
whenever you feel doubtful about these methods, that you will be seen as 
more trustworthy, and that trust is critical if you hope to be seen as reliable 


by those around you. 


Making Eye Contact 


Eye contact is one of those skills that you need to develop to be effective at 
communicating, but it is also one that people tend to struggle with. Eye 
contact can make what you are saying more impactful and change how 
people view you as you speak, but it can also be quite difficult to maintain. 
If you want to be able to communicate clearly, you need to develop a 
tolerance for making eye contact, or at least learning how to make eye 


contact in a way that convinces the other party that you are looking at them. 


Because so many arguments and conflicts can be linked to a communication 
mistake, being able to communicate clearly and effectively is critical. With 
good eye contact and solid communication skills, you will find that people 
around you are far more willing to listen to what you have to say. They will 
trust you more frequently and more willingly. They will be more engaged in 
the conversation and exchange and be more likely to remember you fondly 
and happily. The beginning of this all is eye contact. After all, if someone 
does not make strong eye contact with you, you usually assume that they 
are untrustworthy— it is a sign of deception, and that is not what you want 


to be portraying if you want to be seen as honest and worthy of listening to. 


When you use eye contact, you are telling the other person that you are 
listening and interested. You tell the other person that, at that moment, your 
focus is on that other person, meaning that they are free to continue. 
However, people generally struggle with eye contact. If you want to better 
your ability to make meaningful eye contact, try to follow the following 


steps. 


The 50/70 rule 


At first glance, this may seem confusing since it does not add up to 100, but 
it actually makes sense. You are looking for eye contact that is good, 
meaningful, but not staring and uncomfortable. While we all want to 
receive eye contact to know that we matter and that the other party is 
actively listening, we also do not want too much eye contact. Too much 
feels aggressive and uncomfortable, and for that reason, you need to find 
that middle ground where you give enough eye contact to acknowledge but 


not so much that you are staring at the other person. 


This is managed by making eye contact 50% of the time when you speak, 
and 70% of the time when you are listening. When people speak, they 
naturally look away as they gather their thoughts. This is because thinking 
is incredibly difficult to manage. Eye contact is mentally intensive and 
exhausting, and for this reason, it can get distracting if you try to maintain it 
constantly during a conversation. By making eye contact half of the time 
when you speak, you tell the other person that you are talking to them 


without coming across as rude or challenging. 


When you are listening, however, you want to be seen as attentive to 
encourage the other person to keep talking. This is where the 70% rule 
comes in—you want to look at them more so they feel like they have your 
attention, but you still want to avoid any actual staring as people generally 
do not enjoy being stared at. It is distracting, uncomfortable, and can cause 


problems. 


Maintain 4-5 seconds of eye contact at a time 


When you are making that eye contact, make sure that you take a break 
every 4 or 5 seconds. Doing so breaks the eye contact enough to soften it up 
without appearing flighty or distracted. By breaking your eye contact every 
few seconds, you make it clear that you are not trying to be rude or 
aggressive, and by returning back to the speaker, you tell them that they still 


have your full attention. 


Pay attention to where you look 


When you are taking a break from eye contact, it can be easy to look down 
or look off quickly. This, however, tends to make you look nervous, and 
therefore not trustworthy. When you are breaking your eye contact, make it 
a point to look to the side rather than looking down. Veering off to the side 
or up and to the side implies thinking, but looking down makes you seem 


uncomfortable or shy. 

Immediate eye contact 

When you want to talk to someone, make sure that you get eye contact 
before you speak, and make sure that you meet eyes as you begin to speak. 
You want that eye contact present as the speaking begins. Establish your 
eye contact, talk, and then look away. 


Look between the eyes 


If you find that legitimate eye contact is too uncomfortable to maintain, you 


can try looking in between the eyes at the bridge of the nose instead. You 


can usually use this to fool the other person into thinking that you are 
looking at them, though you are saving yourself from the discomfort of eye 
contact. Of course, genuine eye contact is always preferred, but you can use 
this as a crutch while you work on establishing your eye contact more 


readily and regularly. 


Listening Effectively 


Along with making good eye contact, you must also be able to listen 
effectively if you hope to make good progress with people around you. 
Listening is another of those skills that many people take for granted—they 
feel like being able to listen to someone should be easy since we have a 


sense of hearing. All you need to do is hear, right? 
Wrong. 


Hearing is entirely different from listening. Hearing is passive, whereas 
listening is active. When you are hearing someone, you are simply 
registering that they are talking. You do not truly understand what is 
intended or being said, even if you are able to more or less summarize the 
point of what was said. When you hear someone, you are not necessarily 


listening to them, but when you are listening to someone, you hear them. 


Active listening is one of those skills that you can develop then to elevate 
your hearing to listening. In doing so, you will find that communication, in 
general, is greatly improved. If you can communicate and listen effectively, 
you will get a better understanding of what was intended by that 
conversation because you took the time to listen and inquire about it instead 
of just making assumptions. 


How to Listen Actively 


When you are ready to listen actively, you will have to go through several 
steps. You effectively want to ensure that you are in a position that is able to 
listen and pay attention. You want to avoid distractions. You want to give 
the other person your undivided attention. You want to really listen without 


contemplating how you will respond to the other person. 


This may sound simple in theory, but think about what your mind is doing 
during a conversation—do you find that you end up spending the time 
trying to figure out how to answer the last point made when the other 
person is still talking? That is not active listening. That is hearing the other 
person and then distractedly putting together a rebuttal that may be entirely 
irrelevant by the end of the conversation, and that is not fair to the other 


person. To listen actively, then, you will do the following: 


e Step 1: Face the other person: This is where you give them your 
undivided attention. No phones or screens present. You will make 


sure that you are making eye contact and undistracted. 


e Step 2: Listen: When you are listening, make sure that you are 
actively paying attention to what the other person is saying. You 
are not trying to come up with a response during this period—you 


are simply listening to the other person. 


e Step 3: Attentive body language: Remember how you would 
nod when trying to build rapport? That comes back here. Make 
sure that you nod and give affirmation that you are still listening 
as the other person talks, but do not interrupt. You also want to 
make sure that you lean in slightly as you listen to the other 
person and keep your own body language open and receptive as 
well. This means no crossing of the arms and paying attention 


effectively. 


e Step 4: Ask questions: When you get to the end of the other 
person’s speech, ask them a few questions. These should be 
clarifying questions, not questions designed to poke holes in the 
other person’s argument. Take the time to ask if you understood 
properly. 

e Step 5: Form your answer: Do not begin to formulate your 
response to the other person until you have gotten confirmation 
that you do, in fact, understand what was said. At that point, take 


a minute to put together a response, and then go ahead and give it. 


When you follow these steps, you will find that you are actually far better at 
understanding what people are saying than you initially thought. You will 


begin to get more insight from other people. Others will trust you more in 


conversation with them. They will be more inclined to listen to you as well, 
and you will be more prepared for your own NLP journey. Remember, if 


you want to be able to master NLP, you need to be able to listen effectively. 


Confident Body Language 


Finally, one last method that you can use to better your own communication 
with others is to develop confident body language. This means that you 
need to make sure that you do not close yourself off to contact other people. 
If you are quite conscientious about your body language, making sure that 
you portray yourself in a positive and attentive manner, you will find that 


you are actually far more effective in communicating with others. 


This section will provide you with several different ways that you can keep 
your body language effective and confident in order to convince others to 
show confidence in you as well. If you can attract confidence, you will find 
that others are more receptive to your attempts to communicate with them. 

e Stand up tall: The best way to be seen as assertive and confident 
is to keep your body language tall and open. The best way to do 
this is to straighten your spine, keep your head straight, and make 
sure that your legs are nicely spaced. You should stand with your 
feet at shoulder-width apart—doing so makes it clear to other 


people that you are confident and comfortable with yourself. 


e Use power poses: Some poses, such as standing calmly and tall 
while your hands are behind your back, exude confidence without 
being overpowering. If you are able to use your power poses, you 
will not only tell other people that you are comfortable and 


confident, you will also begin to feel more confident as well. 


e Keep track of your hands: Make sure you watch what your 
hands are doing. It can be incredibly easy to offend someone with 


a misplaced gesture or by hiding your hand in your pocket. Be 


mindful of what you do with them to ensure that you show that 


you are calm and in control. 


Make good eye contact: This cannot be more important or more 
emphasized—you need to be able to make good eye contact to be 


deemed as confident. 


Avoid fidgeting: People who are unconfident often find that they 
are regularly caught up in fidgeting or other nervous behaviors 
simply because they are uncomfortable. Their body betrays that 
lack of confidence. Try to stand still and open when you are 


communicating in order to be seen as confident. 


Open body language: Make sure that you keep your body 
language wide open. This means that you cannot be crossing your 
arms in front of you or otherwise attempting to hide when 
communicating. You want to ensure that the other person does not 


see you as dishonest or unwilling to communicate effectively. 


Chapter 10: NLP for a Successful Life 


Finally, we have reached the last chapter in this book. You may be feeling 
like you have far more insight into how you can use NLP and influence 
other people. However, you can also use it on yourself as well. Do you have 
some sort of negative trauma that makes it difficult for you to function? 
Perhaps you feel like you have been held back by your emotions or attempts 
to get through life. Well, after reading this book, you now have several tools 
that can help you feel better about who you are, what you want, and how 
you live life. All you need to do is begin to utilize them. 


NLP can be used upon yourself regularly enough to make yourself happier, 
healthier, and more confident. In attracting happiness and confidence, you 
will find that you are far more successful in your endeavors. You may 
realize that you are able to better communicate and relate to people after 
having defeated your anxiety or fears. You may find that you are able to get 


along better because you can communicate easier. You may find that you 


are simply feeling better without that concern over how people will see you 
is gone. 

When you are able to wield NLP for yourself, you can begin to defeat any 
traumas that have lingered, holding you back for far too long. You will be 
able to reframe those traumas, separating from that negativity and figuring 
out ways to make those memories something far less traumatic. You will be 
able to anchor yourself in a process that is incredibly similar to the one used 
for other people, and with using this, you will find that you are able to 
defeat negative habits. With those habits gone, you will feel far more 
capable. You will be empowered. You will be successful. You will be using 


NLP for its truest purpose—to wield to help others and yourself. 


This chapter will guide you through three techniques that you can use to 
wield the power of NLP on yourself. You will learn how to use dissociation 
in order to distance yourself from feelings related to a specific traumatic 
event or to remove a trigger between an event and a feeling. You will learn 
to use reframing to change the way that you view an event or memory. 


Lastly, you will be guided through how to anchor yourself with ease. 


Dissociation 


Anxiety can be debilitating, especially if it is an anxiety toward something 
that you must face regularly. Let’s go back to the example of the woman 
who had an accident in front of her class and could never get past it again. 
She may decide, after reading through this book, that she wants to go 
through the process of dissociation. She wants to figure out how to remove 
that inherent link between her negative feelings and being able to go in 


front of crowds once and for all. 


This process involves three simple steps: Identify the problematic emotion, 


focus on it and the cause, and then visualize and change. 


Our friend may identify that she feels shame. She is ashamed that she 
urinated on herself in class in front of all of her peers, and that shame 
comes up regularly. She acknowledges that she feels that same shame every 
time she stands in front of other people, such as her coworkers, or when she 
has to go to an interview, and in the back of the mind, she is always afraid 


that it will happen again. 


Next, she must visualize the triggering event. In this case, she visualizes the 
incident like it was yesterday—she stops and remembers how she felt when 
she had to go to the restroom but was too afraid to raise her hand and ask to 
go. She had been embarrassed that she was going to go during a 


presentation, and she worried that those around her would be angry that she 


did not hear the presentation that was given. She imagines elementary 
school her going up to the front of the class, trying desperately to give her 
own presentation, even though she really needed to go to the restroom. She 
hears the sound of the rain pitter-pattering on the window in the classroom, 
and she remembers the sensation of wet warmth spreading down her legs. 
She remembers the sound of laughter that exploded within the room and the 
embarrassment and tears as she ran to the bathroom, with urine squelching 
in her shoes. She remembers this as vividly as possible, and she can feel her 


face turning bright red in shame as she does. 


With the memory firmly in mind, it is time to repeat that scene again, but 
this time, trying to distance herself from the shame that she felt. It is time 
for her to look at the memory in a way that reduces the negativity. Perhaps 
she imagines that everyone wet their pants at the same time, and the 
laughter was directed toward everyone, not just her. Maybe she imagines 
that instead of urine, she had spilled soda or something else on her lap. She 


wants to change the context, so it is no longer distressing and instead funny. 


Over time, the negative emotions will fade away. It may take time and 
repetition, but over time, the feelings of shame will be desensitized and fade 


away. 


Content Reframing 


Another technique that can be useful toward yourself is learning to reframe 
the content. You will effectively be taking the feeling that you want to 
eliminate and reframing what has happened in order to change the result. 
This is effectively attempting to tap into the cycle of thoughts, feelings, and 
behaviors. For example, if you feel like you are a bad person, you are going 
to act in ways that fail to show that you are a good person—you will be 
nervous and flighty. This will lead other people to want to keep their 


distance, only further reinforcing that initial thought of being a bad person. 


When you are able to remove that initial negative feeling, so you stop 
obsessing, you will see a change in behavioral patterns as well. For 
example, let’s go back to the woman who urinated in class as a child. She is 
so concerned with embarrassing herself in public again that she gets afraid 
every time he knows that she has to perform or give a presentation. This 
leads to nervousness, which leads to a failure to perform to satisfaction, 


which further reinforces her fear. 


In reframing, you will effectively stop focusing on the negative and instead 
shift your attention to something else that will help, such as accepting your 
own responsibility for your emotions. You may decide that you will no 
longer worry about failing or making a mistake and instead focus on how to 
ensure that your project is as successful as possible. In doing so, you will 
actually shift your attention to something that you can fix. In the end, you 
will perform better and teach yourself that the shift in attention is absolutely 


necessary. You will find that life gets better and that you actually are not as 


afraid of presentations as you initially were because you have begun to get 


some positive experiences out of it. 


Anchoring Yourself 


Finally, the last process that will be discussed within this book is how to 
anchor yourself. You will be able to use that anchoring process with all of 
the benefits of anchoring that was discussed earlier and begin to apply it to 
yourself as well. The only real difference in anchoring yourself versus 
anchoring others is that when you anchor yourself, much more of the 
process is internal. You do not have to try to trigger emotions in other 


people—instead, you are focused on yourself and what you need to do. 


This will follow the same steps as anchoring other people: You will still be 
making it a point to identify an emotion, identifying a trigger for the 
emotion, identifying an anchor, triggering the emotion, and then using the 
anchor until it works. That stays the same. What changes are the methods 
through which you are able to anchor other people? Instead of focusing on 
how to trigger the feelings in other people externally, you must trigger them 


within yourself. 


For example, consider our friend who had the accident once more. Perhaps 
she wants to stop feeling anxious and instead feel relaxed when she is 
presenting. She declares that the feeling that she wishes to trigger is 
relaxation. She then must think of a time during which she felt that emotion 
incredibly strongly in order to use it. Perhaps she chooses a time on her 
wedding night during which she and her newlywed husband watched the 
sunset over the ocean to the sound of the waves lapping at the beach. That 
time was particularly relaxing for her and she loved it. That memory 


becomes her trigger for her emotion. 


Now, she chooses a simple anchor—she decides to use a very specific 
tapping pattern of her toes against the bottom of her shoe, as she knows that 
it will be discreet, and she will be able to use it in public without anyone 


ever knowing. 


She thinks about that memory at the beach, waiting for the feelings of 
relaxation to wash over her, and right as those emotions reach their peak, 
she taps her toes within her shoe to the pattern she is linking to the memory. 
Over the course of several days and attempts at this, she finds that every 
time she taps her toes, she is reminded of that relaxing memory. She has 
now anchored herself to that feeling and can use it any time she is in public 
and feeling distressed, or whenever she has to present for someone at work. 
She can use these techniques and find that her stress and anxiety simply 


melt away. 


Conclusion 


Congratulations! You have made it to the end of Manipulation and Dark 
Psychology. Throughout this journey, you have been provided with several 
different methods through which you could control other people’s mind, 
whether through influence, manipulation, NLP, or persuasion. Each of these 
tactics have their uses in certain contexts, and as you are ready to embark 
on your journey beyond this book, you may even have some ideas of how 


you wish to wield the information contained within. 


Throughout this book, you were provided with advice that was meant to be 
actionable. Whenever possible, you were given a step-by-step guide, and 
hopefully, you have found this to be useful for you as you prepare to take 
this advice into the real world. Remember, as you prepare to leave this book 
behind that you keep any usage of the techniques within this book as 
benevolent as possible. Remember, people have a right to their own free 
will, and while it can be fun to think about the idea of taking control of 
someone else just to see if you can, doing so is not kind or respectful to the 
people around you. You must remember to use the information included in 
this book respectfully and responsibly. After all, little is as precious to 


people as their own free will and minds. 


Now, you may be wondering what to do next with the information that you 
have read. You may be itching to try some of these techniques, and that 
makes sense! You may be curious to see how much of this book is actually 
truthful. So long as you are willing to take responsibility for anything that 


you do, you are free to do what you want. 


From here, some places to go next may be to look into more about dark 
psychology. You may be interested in other techniques that can be used to 
influence other people. Another good place to go from here would be to 
look into how to analyze people better. After all, so much of the skills 
include within this book require you to be skilled at understanding the state 
of mind of someone else. Perhaps you are interested in learning about the 
people whose minds are prone to wield manipulation, such as the narcissist. 
Maybe you want to see more about dark psychology and how else you can 
slip into the mind of someone else completely undetected. Perhaps what 
you really want to do is learn how to use someone else’s unconscious mind 


against them. 


No matter what you wish to do next, remember what you have been taught 
here. Remember the importance of respecting the integrity of other people 
whenever possible and to act in ways that are responsible and not abusive or 
controlling. It can be easy to wield these tools like the manipulator and the 


abuser, but then you have lowered yourself to their levels. 


Thank you for joining me on this journey into the unconscious mind and 
looking at how you can access and influence it in nearly anyone. If you 
have found this book to be actionable, helpful, informative, or beneficial in 
any way, please feel free to leave a review on Amazon. Your insight and 


opinion is always greatly welcomed and appreciated! 


Dark Psychology Secrets 


Techniques of Dark Psychology to Analyze 
and Read People's Mind with Persuasion, 


Hypnosis, Deception, and Brainwashing 


Introduction 


Congratulations on purchasing Dark Psychology Secrets and thank you for 


doing so. 


Have you ever wondered why some of the most insidious people on the 
planet are somehow able to charm everyone to fall for their every whim? 
Think of serial killers like Ted Bundy—he was commonly believed to be a 
handsome, charismatic young man that was able to quickly and easily win 
the favor of others almost naturally, and yet behind the scenes, he was a 
serial rapist and murderer of at least 30 homicides over a 4 year period of 
time. How did he do it? How was he able to sneak past so many people 


undetected for so long? 
The answer is through dark psychology. 


Many of the darkest personality types out there are quite capable of 
seeming charming and affable, only to be hiding the monster underneath 
their masks. This is a method they use to prey on other people, victimizing 
those who dare to fall for their charm. Dark psychology delves into these 
personality types, studying the underlying motivations for the behaviors at 
hand. This is not only to understand what to look out for when you are in 
the real world—when you learn to understand the minds of those with dark 


personalities, you can begin to claim their own ways of thinking. 


Dark psychology is a study of people with these dark personalities, but also 
a study of the tactics that are used, why they work, and how they can be 


adapted. You can use several of these tactics without becoming abusive or 


using them in a harmful way. What if you were able to find ways to come 
across as charming and persuasive to others, and you used those powers to 
help yourself and others? Perhaps you, being charismatic and particularly 
skilled in influence, were able to become a powerful leader within a 
company—you could use the powers of dark psychology to keep morale up, 
keep people motivated, and ensure that others are happy and willing to 
move forward. You would be able to always find the perfect way to 
convince other people to carry on. You would be able to ensure that 
everyone under your charge was happy to help. You would find yourself 


running a particularly successful business. 


Now, what if you were in sales or politics and convincing people is what 
you need to do best? Dark psychology can show you the ways that people 
are able to slip undetected into the mind of another to plant ideas, convince 
others to see things your way, and move forward. You could use these skills 
in advertising or consulting. Despite the root in darkness and evil, dark 
psychology techniques can be particularly useful, even under the most 
innocent contexts, and this book seeks to show you exactly how they are 
able to do that. 


This book will guide you through an overview of dark psychology, allowing 
you to get to know those dark personality types and how they work. You 
will learn about manipulation and how to use it to control the minds of 
others. You will learn to persuade with skill. You will understand the 
insidiousness of brainwashing and how it can be used to completely 
indoctrinate a person into a certain belief system. You will discover 
deception and neuro-linguistic processing. You will learn to use hypnosis to 


coax people into a state of suggestibility. Lastly, you will see the benefits of 


dark psychology, learning how it can be used in daily relationships in order 


to help all involved. 


There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for 
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much 


useful information as possible, please enjoy! 


Chapter 1: Dark Psychology 


Psychology at its root is something that is relatively simple to define—it is 
the scientific study of the mind. It covers several different aspects, looking 
into relationships, behaviors, thought processes, and more. When you are 
looking into psychology, you are looking for the why and how of essentially 
any human process form the mental side. You may be looking at 
neurobiological processes, such as what happens within the brain when it is 
actively controlling the body, or you may be looking at why that 5-year-old 
child at the grocery store had a massive meltdown when told no to candy. It 
studies all of that and more, but essentially, it is the study of who we are as 
a species and as an individual. It studies what we do, what drives us, and 
what causes us problems. It explains emotions and how they both function 
and aid humans in acting. It explains why some people give in to pressure, 


but others do not. It explains why empathy is so important. 


Ultimately, psychology exists in several different classifications. Some 
people are only interested in the physical aspect while others care about 
development. Others still are interested in the divergences between typical 
psychological development and the developments of people who may 
become particularly hard to live with. It has several uses, both practical and 
simply intellectual—if you understand human psychology, you are able to 
see and predict how people will behave. Knowing those tendencies, you can 
accurately figure out what will happen, and learn how to use those 


tendencies to your own benefit. 


Defining Dark Psychology 
Dark psychology, in particular, will look specifically at the psychology of 


people that have a very specific personality type. In particular, we are 
looking at those who are Machiavellian, narcissistic, sadistic, and 
psychopathic. These people tend to be among the most dangerous that you 
can encounter, and they will have no qualms about using and abusing other 
people. However, there is much to learn from this personality type—if you 
can come to understand this personality type and the tactics that are 
commonly used, you will be able to emulate them without the threat or 


harm that may otherwise go along with them. 


In particular, this book will be looking at the behaviors of those with dark 
personality types. We will spend Chapter 2 looking specifically at the dark 
side of psychology, studying what those particular personality traits are and 
how they present themselves. From there, the duration of the book will be 


spent studying the behavior of those specific personality types. 


Dark psychology assumes that when people behave in abusive manners, 


using techniques like manipulation and deception, it almost always has a 


reason. We will look at those reasons and applications as well, learning 
what it is that makes these tools so attractive to monsters in human clothing 
that are willing to wield them. You will see exactly why people behave in 
ways that are abusive or evil, how they come to the realization that they do 
that justifies the abuse in their minds, and how they are able to overcome 
the empathy and compassion that usually prevents people from behaving in 


such abusive manners. 


We will look at several of the most commonly used techniques of the 
abusive personality types, and from there, we will spend time discussing 
how several of them can be used in a wider context, allowing for their 
usages during day-to-day interactions. Instead of manipulating someone to 
abuse them, you can look into how to use the same skills to help persuade 


and guide people toward whatever they need to do. 


We will also look into how these particular tactics impact the person that is 
being subjected to them. Some of these techniques work through instilling 
feelings in other people, knowing that emotions are incredibly motivating. 
Others work through accessing the unconscious mind, suggesting certain 


behaviors. Others still work through acts of deception. 


Understanding dark psychology will not only enable you to understand the 
actions of personality types such as the narcissist, the Machiavellian, and 
the psychopath but also be able to combat it. You will be able to avoid 
falling for their tactics if you know what the tactics are. This means that 
learning to think like the darkest personality types is imperative—when you 


can think like them, you can identify them. 


The History of Dark Psychology 


Traditionally considered a field of applied psychology, dark psychology 
begins with the study of the dark triad or the study of manipulation. 
Considering that dark personality types have existed as long as history can 
record, it comes as no surprise that those interested in understanding these 
dark types have been scattered across history as well. In particular, it is 
possible to find evidence of studies surrounding manipulation and abuse in 
nearly every culture around the world. Humans have always victimized 
other humans as long as they have been able to. You can read in history 
books about how people used to take slaves, destroy other towns and 


villages, and steal. 


Ultimately, up until relatively recently in history, attempts to manipulate 
and control other people were common, but not particularly controlled or 
recorded. It happened on a regular basis, but without proper guidance and 
logging that allows for it to be tracked. After all, even religious texts make 
reference to manipulation, such as referencing Eve being deceived by the 


snake. 


In proper psychology, there have been studies to determine how 
stimulations of any kind can change behaviors. These have studied aspects 
such as whether fear can be conditioned and learned, or whether adding 


certain situations or wording could convince people to act in certain ways. 


Perhaps one of the earliest records of controlling the behaviors of others 
comes in 1897 with Ivan Pavlov’s study of dogs and their behavior. He 
learned that some of the behavior of dogs seems to be innate, such as 


salivating in response to food. He also learned that innate behaviors can be 


linked to other stimuli. Instead of the dog salivating at food, for example, he 
conditioned the dogs to salivate to the sound of a bell through what was 


eventually called classical conditioning. 


In classical conditioning, you are able to take unconditioned responses and 
cause them with unconditioned stimuli. The food is the unconditioned 
stimulus, and in response to seeing it, the dog will salivate in response. That 
unconditioned stimulus gets paired with a conditioned stimulus, and in 
response over time, you will see that the unconditioned response occurs 


when exposed to the conditioned stimulus. 


The concept of classical conditioning was strongly supported by 
psychologist John Watson, who declared that he believed that classical 
conditioning was involved in all aspects of human development and 
psychology. He pushed the point in 1920 in an experiment during which he 


conditioned a 9-month-old infant to fear anything white and fuzzy. 


In particular, during this experiment, a child referred to as Little Albert was 
provided access to several white animals in a neutral setting. He was shown 
a rat, a rabbit, a monkey, and several other items. At first, Little Albert was 
not afraid of any of them. He was unafraid of what he saw in front of him. 
Eventually, the white rat was presented, along with the sudden loud bang of 
a hammer on a steel bar just behind his head. While the rat itself was not 
disturbing to the child, the sound was, and he cried. From 11 months on, he 
was exposed to the rat with the loud noise occurring once a week for seven 
weeks. Of course, the child cried each time. After the seven weeks, all that 


researchers had to do to trigger the meltdown was to show him the rat in 


question. Upon seeing the rat, even without the noise, he would cry in fear 
and attempt to flee. 


That was not all—Little Albert became phobic of anything that was white 
and fuzzy. Whether a white dog, a piece of cotton wool or even Santa 
Claus, the sight of something white and fuzzy was enough to send him into 
a panic. While this behavioral response faded somewhat over time without 
reinforcement, it was still readily triggered by repeating the creation of the 
loud sound that went along with the rat. 


This becomes a foundation for many different forms of manipulation and 
influence. You will see this concept arise repeatedly when you look at 
neuro-linguistic programming, during which you will see what is called 
anchoring, a technique to trigger a certain behavior with a specific 
emotional response. It can also be relevant in emotional manipulation as 


well. 


After the discovery and conceptualization of classical conditioning, the 
concept of operant conditioning arose as well. Particularly in 1936, B.F 
Skinner came up with the concept, drawing heavily from Thorndike’s 1898 


Law of Effect, which posited that anything with a positive consequence is 
likely to be repeated, while anything with a negative consequence is going 
to be avoided. For example, if a child is given a piece of candy after 
cleaning up his mess, the child is going to be more inclined to pick up the 
toys in the future, thanks to the positive effect. Conversely, if the child yells 
at someone and then gets a negative consequence, such as having to go to 


their room, they are not as likely to repeat it. 


This concept was reiterated within Skinner’s theory, and he added to it a 
new concept—reinforcement. Skinner asserted that if a behavior is 
reinforced, meaning that it is rewarded, it will be repeated or strengthened. 
The person is likely to repeat those behaviors that are reinforced because 
they had a good result. However, when reinforcement does not occur, that 


behavior is going to be weakened or extinguished. 


In 1948, Skinner reiterated these concepts with experiments. He created 
what he called a “Skinner Box” which was a box in which an animal had 
access to a lever, a speaker, and two signal lights. There was also an 
electrical grid on the bottom that would generate a shock. The animals were 
shocked when they pressed the lever with a specific light illuminated, but 
when they used the lever with the other light illuminated, they were 


rewarded with a piece of food. 


Through this experiment, it was shown that there are three types of 
responses that will follow a behavior: Neutral operands, during which the 
environment neither encourages nor discourages the repetition of behavior, 
reinforcers, which drive the individual to repeat the behavior and punishers, 


which discourage the repetition. 


You will see this concept when looking at techniques such as intermittent 
reinforcement, during which a manipulator will give positive reinforcement 
only sometimes. As you can see, much of behaviorism becomes incredibly 


relevant to the study of dark psychology. 


The 1960s came with Albert Bandura, another prominent behaviorist, 
acknowledging and agreeing with classical and operant conditioning while 
also adding two distinct and important ideas. He asserted that there are 
processes between the stimuli exposed to and responses and that behavior is 


a learned concept that develops via observational learning. 


In particular, Bandura presented an experiment known as the Bobo doll 
experiment in 1961. He argued that children, in particular, will pay attention 
to the behaviors or their models—people that they are surrounded by—and 
they will imitate the behaviors that they were exposed to. Think of how a 
toddler may yell out something embarrassing in public, not realizing that it 
is embarrassing because he has heard it from his parents: This is the perfect 


example. 


In Bandura’s experiment, he exposed children between the ages of 3 and 6 
to violent behaviors toward a doll. First, children were studied to see how 
aggressive they were as a baseline. They were then sorted into groups of 
similar temperaments, in which some were shown an aggressive role model, 
some were shown a non-aggressive role model, and some were given no 
role model. The aggressive role model was aggressive toward a Bobo doll 


—they were given a hammer to beat the doll with and threw the doll around 


while yelling, “Pow, boom!” The non-aggressive model saw a model 


ignoring the doll and playing with another toy quietly. 


The children were then offered access to several other toys, which a 
researcher told them were the best toys of all. Their behaviors were then 
recorded. Children who had been exposed to the aggressive behaviors 
tended to behave aggressively toward the Bobo doll that they had access to. 
This shows us that children learn behaviors through observation—social 
behavior is learned and influenced heavily based upon model, becoming the 


basis for the Social Learning Theory. 


This is further supported in several of the tactics used in dark psychology as 
well. People are more readily persuaded by people similar to them, much 
like how the children are more likely to mimic people similar to them. 
People are also more likely to mimic others in unfamiliar settings as well, 


which is displayed in tactics such as persuasion. 


As you continue to read through this book, you will find that much of the 
concepts that are innately used by the manipulators that are being studied 
involve many of the concepts of behaviorism. It becomes recurring, and in a 
way, it makes sense: Behaviorism is a study of how people act and how the 
environment influences behavior. Dark psychology seeks to control and 
change the behaviors of other people. As you continue to read, keep these 


key processes in mind as they will be quite relevant. 


Chapter 2: The Dark Side of Personality 


Imagine Anna for a moment: Young, finishing up her last year at college, 
and single. She is out with friends at a bar, and her other two friends have 
both already met people that they are animatedly chatting with. Anna, 
however, is a bit more self-conscious. She does not feel like she belongs 
there, and she sits between her friends, sipping at her drink. Then, she sees 


him. 


The man is handsome and smiling at her. He approaches and offers to buy 
her a drink. He says his name is Ethan and that he has just graduated from 
the same university Anna goes to, just last year. He asks a few questions 
that are not too prying—is she a student? What is she studying? What a 
coincidence—he also majored in business! Is she from the area? No way— 
he grew up 30 minutes from her hometown. They seem like normal 
questions to Anna—he is getting to know her, and it appears that they have 
several major things in common. She chats with him, and soon, they are 
talking about her past relationship and how it was incredibly messy, so she 


isn’t looking for anything at the moment. 


Instead of scaring him away, he nods sagely and acknowledges that he had 
been in a relationship with a particularly abusive, narcissistic woman not 
too long ago and he was just looking for someone to get to know as friends. 
They spend the rest of the night in the bar chatting happily, and when Anna 
and her friends are ready to go, he smiles, writes down his phone number 
for her, and bids them good night. 


Anna finds herself hooked—she cannot stop thinking about Ethan and how 
much they had in common. Soon, she is texting him, and she finds out that 
not only have their lives paralleled quite closely, they share very similar 
hobbies. They both like to sit in and read with a nice cup of wine. They 
both like to go on hikes in the nearby mountains. They both share a love for 
playing video games—but the same type of obscure RPG, not the 


mainstream titles that come out. 


Soon, Ethan has slid into Anna’s life entirely. He is over at her apartment 5 
or 6 days a week and stays the night at least half of them, usually falling 
asleep halfway through a movie. He brings her flowers and lavishes her in 
positive attention. He loves to listen for hours about everything that she has 
gone through in the last few years and offer his own opinions as someone 


who had been in a similar relationship before. 


Anna tells herself that he is the one. He is different. He is kind and caring. 
He knows how to listen. She soon finds herself head over heels in love with 
him. They fall hard and fast for each other, and within three months, they 
are engaged—after all, they are soul mates. Six months later, she is 
pregnant. Nine months later, they are married. Shortly before the baby is 
born, it is like a switch has flipped. He is mean and cold. He is constantly 
disappearing overnight at the bar. He puts her down and when she cries, he 
calls her hormonal. It was like the Ethan that she knew, loved, and married, 


was nothing but a lie. 


This is because he had lied. People with dark personalities have no qualms 
about preying on other people. Just as the wolf does not think twice about 
the feelings of deer, the dark personality type does not care about his 
victims. Ethan had disguised himself precisely because he was hunting 
Anna: He was intentionally trying to make himself attractive to her—he 


wanted to be able to interest and attract her in order to gain control. 


Oftentimes, people with dark personalities, with the propensity to 
manipulate, hunt, and use other people, present themselves in four different 
ways: They are Machiavellian, narcissistic, sadistic, or psychopathic. Some 
people will have several of these traits, while others may have just one. 
Nevertheless, these people are dangerous. They are not afraid of inflicting 
extreme mental, and sometimes even physical, harm to other people in 
order to get what they want or need. All that matters to them is that they get 
exactly what it is that they needed. 


People with these dark personality types are known as having dark cores— 
they are more likely to engage in antisocial behaviors such as behaving 
malevolently, stealing, cheating, or hurting other people. These are the 


people engaging in dark psychology, and the more that you read through the 
book, the more you will come to recognize the methods through which 


these personality types choose to act. 


Within this chapter, we will stop and take a look at four of the darkest 
personality types—we will look at the Machiavellian, the narcissist, the 
psychopath, and the sadist. We will go over the classical presentation of 
each of these personality traits, as well as the motivators for each. While 
each of them is their own distinct type, with very specific traits, they all 
share similarities. In particular, each of these dark personality types lacks 


empathy. 


A Note on Empathy 


Empathy is the ability to understand and feel other people’s emotions. It is 
primarily responsible for facilitating communication between people, 
allowing others access to the emotional states of those around them. In 
particular, it allows for people to act compassionately—you can put 
yourself in someone else’s shoes, so to speak. If you can see that the person 
across from you is stressed out, you can relate. You can feel that sort of 
stress yourself if you are particularly empathetic. In knowing the emotions 
of someone else, you can then feel moved to help—you can offer to do 


something to alleviate that stress. 


In other instances, empathy allows for the regulation of your own 
behaviors. If you can empathize with someone else, you can make sure that 
you, yourself, are not the cause of their distress. Consider for a moment that 
you are talking to someone and say something that offends them. If you can 
empathize with them, you can see and understand that you upset them—and 
you actually care. In being able to acknowledge that you have upset them, 
you can then make it a point to change your own behaviors. This is why 
empathy is so critical, and why lacking it can be so dangerous. It is what 


usually acts as a deterrent to hurting other people needlessly. 


Machiavellianism 


The first of the personality traits that will be discussed is Machiavellianism. 
Machiavellians are people who are highly manipulative by nature—they are 
able to cheat people out of things without you ever knowing that it has 
happened. This particular trait is named for Niccolo Machiavelli—a 
diplomat and philosopher responsible for writing The Prince—a book that 
discussed that strong rulers must be harsh on their subjects in order to keep 
their rule. In particular, it is believed that the earning of glory and survival 
will justify any means. Effectively, then, this is the beginning of the flawed 


idea that the ends will always justify the means. 


The people with this personality type, then, encompass that form of 
thinking. They feel that they can be manipulative with little repercussions, 


or that the repercussions are meaningless so long as they get their way. 


The Machiavellian is focused on his or her own ambition—all that matters 
is success, no matter what the cost. They will always prioritize their own 
success, regardless of what their idea of success is. If they believe that 
success is defined by their income, they will maximize that income, no 


matter the cost, for example. 


Of course, if they are willing to succeed at any cost, they are typically 
incredibly exploitative. They will have no issues with taking advantage of 
other people, their weaknesses, or even throwing people under the bus if 
they think that it will be enough to get them the success, they believe that 
they deserve. There is no such thing as going too far with the 
Machiavellian, so long as the Machiavellian gets his or her way at the end 
of the day. 


These people tend to be incredibly calculating. They will constantly be 
acting in their own best interests, even when people do not think that they 
are. If they are kind and do a favor, it is because they know that doing that 
favor is the best way to ensure that the other party is going to give them 
what they want later. Nothing they do is without reason, and they are not 
likely to help other people unless they can see some sort of legitimate 
benefit to doing so. This makes it incredibly difficult to identify their true 


intentions. 


The Machiavellian, despite coming across as charming and flattering, is 
usually incredibly cynical—he does not believe that anyone will ever do 
anything for reasons that are not self-serving. To the Machiavellian, if 
anyone does something nice to them, it is because they want or need 
something and think that being ice will get it. In reality, they lack the value 
of inherent human kindness that they typically take advantage of, and their 
lack of empathy means that they do not care when they are taking 
advantage of other people. They will actively and readily harm other 


people, making other people fall for them without ever really committing to 


legitimate relationships. However, because they are so skilled at reading 
those around them and deceiving other people, they are commonly seen as 


far more charismatic and caring than they actually are. 


Narcissism 


The narcissist, on the other and is far less intentional and calculating. While 
the Machiavellian is incredibly meticulous in his manipulation, narcissists 
do not make the intentional decision to be manipulative people. They also 
lack the empathy necessary to regulate their actions regarding how other 
people see them, but in terms of the motivations, the narcissist is 
manipulative because the narcissist is delusional. 

The narcissists are particularly exhausting because they have their own 
grand sense of self—in fact, it is so grand, that most of the time, it is 
grandiose. They are completely convinced that they are the best people out 
there, and entirely perfect. Because they are so confident in their perfection, 
they effectively believe that they are right all the time. There is no way that 
they can be wrong because they believe that they cannot be flawed, and this 
turns into them believing that when there is a disconnect between what they 
expect to be true versus what is actually true, they tend to assume that their 


own beliefs are the ones that are right. 


This gets incredibly exhausting as people deal with them—they believe that 
they are perfect and inherently deserving of more than those around them. 
They think that they deserve special treatment and consideration and that 


treatment and consideration means that they will do anything to get it. 


Effectively, the narcissist’s manipulation and harm toward others comes out 
of that expectation of being right all of the time, believing that their 
grandiosity is justification of everything. However, the problem with the 
narcissist is that he is so skilled in convincing other people that he is right 
and deserving of special treatment that he will even gaslight himself into 


believing it. The narcissist will absolutely believe his narrative of what 


happens. If he tells someone that something did not happen in a certain way, 
they have likely convinced themselves of that narrative to protect that 
image of perfection that they are so certain about. They will always believe 


that they are deserving of that perfection, no matter what. 


Narcissists themselves crave the center of attention—while they are unable 
to empathize with other people, they absolutely believe that they are 
deserving of the adoration of others, and they require it in order to feel like 
they are justified. They have a constant need to be admired, and if they are 
not admired, they will do things to gain that admiration, even if it hurts 


other people. 


Psychopathy 


Of the four traits that we are looking at, psychopaths are quite arguably the 
worst of the four. These people have the greatest potential to be harmful. 
When attempting to identify their personality tendencies, the psychopath is 
someone who flags as highly callous, impulsive, manipulative, and 


grandiose. 


Effectively, the psychopath is someone who is not afraid of hurting other 
people to get what he wants. He is willing to give in to those impulses that 
would usually be disregarded quickly. If he has the thought that he wants to 
hurt someone else or toy with someone’s emotions, he will do so as a game, 
simply because he can. He believes that he is able to do this without regard 


for the feelings of other people, and he will do it without thinking twice. 


Like the narcissist, the psychopath thinks incredibly highly of himself—he 
believes that he is smarter than other people and that he is skilled enough to 
get away with whatever he wants to do. If he decides that he will become a 
serial killer, he is convinced that no one will ever be able to catch him—he 
is entirely of the belief that he is more intelligent, sneakier, and more 
capable than any of the people who have attempted this manipulation before 


him. 


Despite the monstrous nature of the psychopath, they are actually incredibly 
adept at social situations. Unlike the narcissist, who may struggle in social 
settings if his grandiosity gets the best of him, the psychopath is even more 
skilled at blending in. They are able to emulate normal humans with ease 


and will do so to their own advantage. They see their skill at blending in as 


a game and they will often try to convince as many people as possible that 


they are trustworthy in order to take advantage again later. 


Sadism 


While the previous three make up the personality types commonly referred 
to as the dark triad, there is one more trait that is important to consider here 
when discussing dark psychology—the sadist. The sadist has all of the 
callousness of the dark triad, but unlike them, they are not particularly 
impulsive or manipulative. The sadist is someone who is entirely motivated 


because he enjoys being cruel. 


The everyday sadist simply wants to hurt people or watch people suffer. He 
may make it a point to join the military or police force, allowing himself to 
shield himself from any repercussions. Within those particular career paths, 
he may feel like he can hurt people or be exposed to harm of others without 
having to hide it. 


Of course, if that sadism comes along with one of the other personality 
types, such as paired with narcissistic personality disorder, it can become 
incredibly problematic—the sadistic narcissist is one that genuinely enjoys 
hurting people but may even feel like he has a right to do so. He will be 
able to justify his actions without having to try very hard simply because he 


knows that he is better than other people. 


Dark Personalities and Abuse 


Ultimately, these personality types lend themselves to abusive individuals 
due to the increase in callousness when compared to the others. Because of 
the callousness, none of the people discussed in this chapter have any 
qualms about their abuse. This means that Ethan, in his relationship with 
Anna, does not care about the pain that has been inflicted. He does not care 
that he effectively trapped someone under false pretenses, creating an 
indelible bond between the two of them forever. Even if she were to leave, 
she would never be able to truly escape him thanks to the fact that they 


share a child. 


Studies have been done on the dark personality types that have shown that 
these people will tend to choose to act in ways that inflict pain, especially if 
they are quite sadistic. In this study, people were asked to choose from one 
of several jobs—the study was disguised in order to make the participants 
believe that they were looking at personality type and job preference. The 
jobs were to reflect the type of dark behaviors that they would then be told 
to do. Some of the jobs were to work in the cold, work in sanitation, or 


being an exterminator. 


Unsurprisingly, most of the sadists chose extermination. From there, the 
scientists created what they called a killing machine—a coffee grinder that 
was modified in order to make crunching sounds, and they were instructed 
that they had to kill several bugs in names with cute names in an attempt to 
humanize them. Throughout the experiment, the sadists absolutely did 
choose to kill the bugs, and they were not disgusted by it. They were happy 
to kill the bugs and enjoyed it, though compared to people without sadistic 


tendencies, they enjoyed anything that they chose to do less than their non- 


sadistic counterparts. 


After these results, another experiment was performed—during this one, 
people were sorted based on personality, and then were asked to play a 
computer game. The people playing the game were told that they were 
competing in order to blast a loud noise at the people in the other room. If 
they won, they would be able to choose how long and loud the blast would 


be. As an important note, the opponents never blasted back. 


Half of these people would then have to work to be cruel—if they won, they 
would then need to count before the blast of noise would occur, with the 
interest of the study being how likely the extra work would deter the people 
from being aggressive. Ultimately, only the sadists chose to work to hurt the 
other party. While those with the dark personality types would all inflict 
some degree of harm to the opponents when it was easy, adding the extra 
layer of work was enough to deter the other personality types. Beyond just 
that, the sadists also chose to raise the blast and make it longer just to hurt 


the other team when they realized that there would be no retaliation. 


Effectively, then, the sadists are the ones who are more likely to hurt other 
people. Even the psychopaths, who will hurt or kill without feeling bad 
about it, usually had purpose to drive them. The Machiavellians were too 
calculating to risk the harm of other people unless they felt like the payoff 
was right. The narcissists usually went out of their way to hurt others when 
they were threatened. However, the sadists would hurt just to enjoy 


themselves. 


This means that, at the end of the day, it is the sadists that are going to be 
the most manipulative. The narcissists will be aggressive and abusive in 
response to the perception of a threat to themselves or their ego. The 
psychopath will hurt to gain something or because he wants something. The 
Machiavellian will abuse only when it seems like the best way to get what 


he wants, and it will not be risky to do so. 


Chapter 3: Manipulation 


Perhaps one of the most common forms of the usage of dark psychology is 
via the use of manipulation. Ethan manipulated Anna as he made it a point 
to get to know her, little by little in order to reflect back what he thought she 
wanted to see. In an act known as narcissistic mirroring, he was able to 
present himself as exactly what Anna wanted, allowing him to draw her in. 
She was convinced that he was perfect in every way when in reality, it was 
all a fagade—he hid behind a very specialized mask in order to win his 


prize: Anna. 


Manipulation primarily exists in two forms—it can be covert, meaning that 
it happens without the manipulated individual knowing about it, or it can be 
overt and in everyone’s face, such as extortion or blackmail that involves 
threatening and coercing the other person into obedience with them 
knowing full well that they must either comply or suffer the consequences. 
In particular, those within the dark tetrad tend to prefer the covert forms of 
manipulation—they want to be able to do their jobs well and effectively 
without worrying about the aftermath. They think that their attempts to 
manipulate will be more effective if they remain hidden, and for the most 


part, they are right. 


When you want to understand manipulation, you must first learn to define 
manipulation and how it works. When you understand that definition, you 
can start to understand how it is used in order to be effective. Once you 
understand the pattern of how manipulation is used, you can begin to 
recognize several specifically manipulative tactics that are commonly used. 


In recognizing the common tactics of manipulators, you can begin to 


recognize the manipulator. Finally, in recognizing the manipulator, you can 


defend against manipulation. 


Defining Manipulation 


Psychological manipulation is ultimately a form of social influence—that 
means that it is attempting to succeed at one of three different end goals: It 
will gain compliance, in which the people will agree to do something, even 
if they do not actually believe it is the right thing to do, it will gain 
identification, which will change the thoughts of the other person, or it will 
gain internalization, in which it will cause a change in belief or behavior 


that is also agreed with publicly and privately. 


Compliance 


* Obedience publically, even if individual does not believe in 


what he or she is doing 


a 
* Individualchoosesto do somethingto belike someoneelse 
| * A change in values and behaviors both publically and privately | 


Effectively, then, manipulation seeks to change someone’s actions, 
thoughts, or both to fit with whatever it is that the manipulator is 
encouraging. In particular, though, manipulation tends to be indirect, 
deceptive, or underhanded. It is designed specifically to change the 
thoughts or behavior without the other person being aware of it while also 


serving the manipulator in some way. 


Most often, the manipulator has some sort of agenda that is being addressed 
—that agenda becomes the goal for that manipulation attempt. Ethan 
wanted to win Anna’s favor, for example—he made it a point to convince 
her that he was someone he was not because he saw something that he liked 
within her. A narcissist may manipulate someone because he wants to gain 
that approval and acknowledgment that he needs if he wants to feel 
comfortable in his own skin. The sadist may manipulate because he wants 
to inflict pain. The Machiavellian may manipulate because he wants to be 


able to achieve an end goal and manipulation is the only way it will happen. 


In order for manipulation to be successful, no matter what the end goal of it 
is, three criteria must be met. The aggression must be concealed in some 
way, usually with the manipulator seeming like someone trustworthy or 
worthy of respect and consideration. The manipulator must have some 
working knowledge of any vulnerabilities that will be exploited, 
understanding how best to move forward to manipulate. Lastly, the 
manipulator must be ruthless enough to not care about lying and potentially 


hurting the other person. 


Think about how this relates back to Ethan for a moment. He came across 
as perfectly charming in the beginning and Anna never suspected a thing. 
He got to know her, noticing in particular exactly how she suffered from an 
abusive relationship in the past, which he used to force a relationship. He 
took advantage of that bit of knowledge and then encouraged her to 
continue discussing anything and everything with her, which he then used 
against her on a regular basis. Any time she told him about something 


personal, he would remember and use it to continue to build the relationship 


more and more. Finally, he was willing to hurt her, even though most 


people would usually hesitate and avoid doing so. 


Using Manipulation 


Most of the time, manipulation occurs in very specific manners. In order to 
manipulate someone, you must be able to meet one of five criteria to use as 
the motivator. Think back to the discussion of behaviorism, particularly 
with Skinner and the discussion of positive reinforcement and punishment. 
This is where these concepts come back, but in terms of manipulating other 
people to control their behaviors, most of the time, there are five distinct 


manners of encouraging or discouraging behavior. 


In artificially installing the desired behaviors with one of these tactics, the 
desired behaviors become learned relatively simply. Ultimately, it will be a 
matter of figuring out which the best particular tactic is for that situation. 
The manipulator has a lot to consider—is the victim someone timid and 
easily malleable? They may respond best to positive reinforcement or the 
use of intermittent reinforcement. Are they more hard-headed? It may be 
best to try utilizing a one-trial learning in an attempt to condition the 


desired response. 


The five distinct manners of controlling the victims of manipulators are 
through the use of positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement, 
intermittent reinforcement, punishment, and traumatic one-trial learning. 
Each of these are used in different ways to differing effects based on the 
target and the desired goal. 


As a quick note before continuing, remember that there is an inherent 
difference between positive and negative, regarding both reinforcement and 


punishment. When you are adding something, whether that something is 


good or bad, you are said to be using positive reinforcement or punishment. 
When you are removing or taking away something, you are using negative 
reinforcement or punishment. This varies from the traditional understanding 
of positive and negative in the more colloquial sense, in which people see 
good things as positive and bad things as negative. We must step past that 


misperception to truly be able to understand what is being discussed as we 


Positive 
reinforcement 
Negative 
reinforcement 


continue. 


a5 Intermittent 
reinforcement 
Traumatic 
learning 


For example, if your child pulled straight A’s on his last report card, you 


may take him out for ice cream—this is an example of positive 
reinforcement. If you find that your child has failed three classes, however, 
you may give him extra chores until he has his grades up. This is an 
example of positive punishment because you are actively giving him an 
aversive stimulus in response to his misbehavior. Alternatively, taking away 
your child’s video game system upon realizing that he is failing his classes 
would be a form of negative punishment—you are taking away something 
positive. Finally, if you are removing a negative situation, such as no longer 


nagging at your child after your child has made it a point to turn in all 


missing work is an example of negative reinforcement—you removed the 


aversive stimulus to encourage the behavior you wanted. 


In general, positive reinforcement is by far the gentlest of the forms of 
manipulation. It will involve the use of creating or giving feedback to the 
victim in some way to encourage a behavior. Effectively, when the use of 
positive reinforcement occurs, the victim is rewarded for doing the desired 
behavior. Think about how a dog that is listening during training is given a 
reward—they are given a small treat to encourage the repetition of those 
desired behaviors. This means that they are more likely to continue with 
those behaviors in the future thanks to the fact that doing them became 
enjoyable. Because the desired behavior gets associated with reward, the 


behavior is more likely to be repeated. 


Negative reinforcement is more or less the opposite: the behavior increases 
because something negative was removed. Imagine that you are being 
nagged at by your boss to finish up that assignment for work—you are only 
alleviated form that constant nagging when you finish. In that case, you 
were negatively reinforced simply because the removal of the aversive 


situation happened. 


Intermittent reinforcement uses reinforcement that is inconsistent. In 
particular, it is most likely used in the occasional revocation of a negative 
reinforcement. For example, imagine that Ethan expects Anna to clean the 
house top to bottom and it is rarely good enough for him, no matter how 
hard she tries. When she cleans up, she is occasionally granted with the 
benefit of having him be pleasant, or at the very least, not as grumpy. 


Occasionally, he chooses to reward her just enough to keep her hooked, 


making sure that she does not want to leave. Instead, she fights harder 
because she sees the occasional hope that the Ethan she fell in love with is 
still there. 


Punishment is the usage of the addition of something unpleasant in order to 
dissuade someone from behaving in a certain way. When you are punishing 
someone, you are usually causing a negative consequence of some sort as a 
direct result of a behavior, or a lack of the proper behavior, in order to keep 


the victim on track. 


Finally, traumatic one-trial learning relates to the use of sudden, harsh abuse 
that is meant to intimidate and traumatize the victim into no longer 
repeating those tactics again in the future. Effectively, the victim does 
something that the manipulator is unhappy about and the manipulator 
drastically punishes him or her. If Anna were to have done something that 
Ethan did not like, he may have decided to leave her on the side of the road 
or threaten to take their shred child in order to strongly discourage her from 
repeating that behavior. The sole purpose of this behavior is to make the 
person so traumatized as a result that they will no longer repeat those 


behaviors. 


Recognizing the Manipulator 


Identifying the manipulator is something that can be incredibly difficult to 
pull off. It is tough to ensure that you can spot when someone else is 
manipulating but being able to do so is incredibly beneficial. Knowledge is 
power and power is a proper defense from being taken advantage of 
needlessly. When you want to recognize and identify the manipulator, you 
will basically be looking for several different traits and actions. If you want 
to be able to know if the other party is, in fact, manipulating you, stop and 
reflect on your relationship. As soon as you know what you are looking for, 
you will find that they become far more transparent than they ever were 


before. 
Manipulators will undermine your ability to trust yourself. 


One of the most common forms of manipulation is known as gaslighting— 
they use this to convince you that what you think is happening around you 
is actually all a figment of your imagination. Even if they have done 
something in front of you, such as taking the last piece of pizza with you 
right there, they will then deny it, saying that you must have eaten it. They 
are so skilled at doing this that you may actually begin to believe them, 


leaving you questioning your own sanity. 
Manipulators say something different than what they are doing. 


Rarely do the words and actions of the manipulator match up. When you 
are being manipulated, you may find that the manipulator is actively saying 
one thing but doing the exact opposite. Perhaps Ethan says that he has 


Anna’s best interest at heart, but nothing he does actually reflects that. 


Instead, he frequently does things that are arguably not in her best interest. 
What he may say is to make sure that she does not eat unhealthy food is 
actually little more than an attempt to keep her under his thumb, making her 


feel bad and causing her to give in without actively trying to fight back. 


You regularly feel guilty when around the manipulator, and you can’t 


explain it. 


When you are around the manipulator, you may find that guilt becomes a 
common occurrence. No matter how hard you try to avoid it, you cannot 
help but feel that sense of guilt, despite your best attempts. You think about 
things and cannot figure out why you would be guilty, and yet there you 
are, feeling like you should have tried more, done better, or attempted 
something entirely different altogether. This is not a fault with you—if you 
are constantly feeling like you are guilty, it is time to reevaluate to 
determine whether you are simply surrounded by people who are hurting 


you or if you have actually been behaving in negative ways. 


The manipulator is always the victim, and you are usually at fault. 


The manipulator is particularly skilled at ensuring that you feel like 
whatever has happened is your fault and that whatever it was is a slight 
toward the manipulator. Even so much as accidentally forgetting to bring 
your partner’s requested food home from the store will suddenly be spun 


around, instead becoming a deliberate attempt to hurt the manipulator. 


The manipulator pushes the relationship far too quickly. 


Much of the time, the manipulator will make it a point to move the 
relationship as quickly as possible. They will share more than they really 
should in order to convince the other party that they are being truthful about 
what they are doing. They will intentionally try to convince everyone 
involved that what they need above all is to move quickly. They will love 
intensely, push business relationships before proper trust is built, and use 
their own feigned vulnerability to fool those around them into sharing and 


making themselves vulnerable as well. 


The manipulator will happily agree or volunteer to help. 


But then it always turns into a martyr act. While he may have agreed 
initially, he will show all sorts of reluctance. If you dare to ask him if he is 
actually reluctant or points out that you will be fine without him, he is likely 
to instead deny and make you feel guilty about even suggesting such a 
thing. Instead, his goal is to make you feel like you are indebted to him for 


future use. 


The manipulator will always be one step ahead of you. 


Whether for better or worse, the manipulator will always be further on the 
spectrum. If you are having a bad day, the manipulator’s day is 
automatically worse. If you just got into a great university, the manipulator 
will be quick to remind you about how he went to a better school. They will 
always simultaneously have it better and worse than you, no matter what is 


going on. 


Defending Against Manipulation 


No one wants to be on the receiving end of manipulation—the problem 
arises when so many people are victimized without knowing what the signs 
of manipulation are. When you do finally learn what they are, however, you 
are able to begin fighting back You can start to make the progress that you 
will need in order to reclaim your life and keep the other party from hurting 
you any further. There are several tactics that you can use to defend against 
manipulation, ranging from avoiding the manipulator altogether to directly 
countering what is being said to you. From here, we will go over three 
methods that you can use to defend yourself from manipulation as it arises 


in your life. 


Know Your Basic Rights 

Perhaps one of the best ways to protect yourself is through learning to 
recognize your own inherent rights as an individual. As a human, you are 
entitled to several basic human rights, and more often than not, the abuser 
tries to get around them. When you recognize and defend your basic human 
rights, you will be able to stand up for yourself—you tell the other party 
that you are not willing to put up with such blatant disrespect and abuse. 
Instead of being willing to lie down flatter and completely disregard the fact 
that you have been treated poorly, you will be instead of making sure that 
you demand the treatment you deserve. Some of these basic human rights 


include: 


e The right to respectful treatment 


e The right to be expressive of your own thoughts, feelings, and 


desires 
e The right to say no for any reason without guilt 
e The right to get anything that you have paid for 
e The right to your own free opinion 
e The right to ensure that you are safe, physically and mentally 
e The right to happiness 
e The right to instate and enforce any boundaries 


Each of these fundamental rights can strengthen your defense against the 
manipulator. If you say that you deserve respectful treatment and demand it 
without exception, you can make it clear that you will tolerate nothing less 
than the utmost basic respect. You will not deal with name-calling, harmful 
or hurtful behavior, or anything else that may keep you down. If you are 
cognizant of the fact that you have several thoughts that are your own, and 
you are entitled to those thoughts, no matter what anyone else thinks, you 
protect yourself from mental manipulation. When you recognize that you 
are free, physically and mentally, you can stop allowing the manipulator to 
hold you back. Effectively, these boundaries become your shields with 
which you fend off the narcissist or manipulator. With those shields, you 
protect yourself from damage. However, the battle is not won simply by 
wielding a shield—you need to be proactively able to protect yourself as 
well. Protecting yourself is as simple as figuring out the best way to probe 


back at the manipulator. 


Probing to Defend from Manipulation 


Questions such as wondering if the request seems reasonable to the 
manipulator, asking if it sounds fair, and then wondering if you have a say 
one way or the other are all ways that you can go out of your way to twist 
things around and put the onus back upon the manipulator. For example, 
imagine that Ethan tells Anna to run to the store as soon as possible to pick 
up a very specific item. She is exhausted and does not want to drive across 
town, but he is incredibly insistent that she goes. She could stop and ask 
him if that seems reasonable to him. She may ask, “Are you really 
expecting that I drop everything after having gotten two hours of sleep, 
right after baby falls asleep, just to get you that special nacho cheese that I 
can only get across town?” When she twists things around like that, it 
suddenly seems far less reasonable for her to have to follow through with 


doing what the manipulator has requested. 


This works for a very specific reason—you are now twisting things around 
and putting the pressure back upon the manipulator. When you are able to 
redirect to the manipulator, you can effectively change the tactic—instead 
of you being on the defensive, you are suddenly on the offense. Instead of 
having to defend yourself, you make the manipulator have to defend against 
you. Effectively, then, you can point out everything that is wrong with the 
suggestion. You leave the manipulator with two choices: He can deny that 
what he is saying is unreasonable, saying that he would absolutely go and 
do what he is asking you to do, or he will be forced to admit that the 


requests are too one-sided and are incredibly unfair. 


Saying No and Enforcing It 
The last method that is quite easy to use in order to disarm the manipulator 


is to simply learn how to say no and mean it. So often, we make it a point to 


let other people rule our lives. We are willing to put up with what other 
people tell us to do and what they say simply because we are too afraid to 
stand up for ourselves. However, think of the implication there—if you do 
not stand up for yourself, you are going to find yourself struggling. You will 
always be pushed around, left and right, expected to do whatever the 


manipulators that want to take advantage of you determine is right. 


When you learn how to say no, however, you take away that power. The 
only power that the bully initially holds over you is the power to rule your 
life. When you learn to say no and really mean it, you are actively telling 
people that they cannot control you. You are saying that you do not consent 
to being taken advantage of, and that is significant. If you can tell other 
people no, then, you can follow through and avoid falling for the problems 


that the manipulator wants you to. 


Manipulators count on what is called the nice guy or nice girl syndrome— 
they assume that you will say yes simply in the name of being polite, and as 
soon as they know that they have an in somehow, whether through you, 
your actions, behaviors, or anything else, they will not hesitate to take 
advantage of you, over and over again without relenting. The only way to 


end this is with your own boundaries. 


This means that when you say no, you need to enforce it. If they continue to 
try to pester you into something, you are within your rights to simply walk 
away. You do not have to consent to being controlled, and in fact, you are 


going to be happier and better off if you refuse to altogether. 


Saying no does not have to be difficult either—all you need to do is 
apologize, say that it does not work for you, and move on. There is no 
reason to explain why it does not work, no matter how hard the other party 
pushes for a reason—if you relent and give them the reason it does not 
work, they will try to find a way to disregard what you are saying in order 
to try to force you into agreeing. Simply responding with, “That doesn’t 
work for me, sorry,” is the perfectly polite way to shut someone else down 
without having to provide much information. Remember, an invitation does 
not mean that you are forced to do something, and a demand is not 


mandatory unless enforced by the law. 


When your boundaries are ignored and continuously stomped upon, what 
you must do is find a way to stand up for yourself. The best way to do so is 
to keep your distance from the other party. While they may initially accuse 
you of being manipulative or controlling, keep in mind that all you are 
doing is choosing to not expose yourself to their ridiculous demands. You 
are protecting yourself, and you should not feel guilty for doing so. Instead, 
focus on the fact that you can get that distance that you needed while also 
making a point to heal. If they try to convince you that you are punishing 
them, remind yourself that you are simply giving yourself time until you 
can see them again without being angry, whether that is in the near future or 
never. You are well within your rights to choose who you associate with, 
and even if they cry and complain and tell everyone that you are a horrible 


person, you are truly only responsible for your own feelings and opinion. 


Chapter 4: Manipulation Techniques to Control 
Minds 


At this point, you should have a fairly decent understanding of the concept 
of manipulation. You should see how it works and be prepared to identify it. 
However, what can make this situation even easier to identify is learning 
how to control minds yourself. Remember, the more you learn and the more 
you are able to understand, the more likely that it is that you can protect 


yourself. 


The tactics that are going to be used here are quite dangerous in the wrong 
hands—for people who have no qualms about hurting other people, these 
can absolutely be weaponized into dangerous techniques that can truly 
convince other people to do dangerous, horrible things. However, they can 
also provide you with valuable insight into the mind of not only the dark 
personality, but also into the mind of the people that they target. When you 
look at how to control a mind, understanding the intricacies that go into 
sneaking into someone’s thoughts, implanting your own, and then escaping 
without ever raising any red flags, you are learning to really interact with 


other people. What if you inserted good thoughts that helped people? 


For the most part, many of the tactics of manipulation are not particularly 
good for usage outside of controlling people, and the tactics that are being 
discussed here make particularly potent weapons. While the ones that you 
find here will largely not be good to use on other people without the intent 
to completely and utterly control someone else at any cost, you will find 
more actionable advice in the next few chapters with techniques that are far 


more target-friendly than most of that of manipulation and mind control. 


Remember, manipulation is a form of influence that is primarily dark. It is 
primarily designed to be hidden, undetected, and drastic, and that is exactly 
what you will see here. You will be provided with a guide to the most 
insidious of the manipulator’s weapons here, from mind control to figuring 
out how to isolate people. 


Mind Control with Implanted Ideas 


Ultimately, mind control is the ability to remove free will—you are 
effectively systematically entering the mind of someone else in an effort to 
get them to think or behave in a different manner than they have been. You 
may be trying to convince someone of something such as to change 
religions or to join a cult, or you could be simply trying to get your best 
friend to agree that the band that you want to go see next weekend is 


actually great, despite the friend hating them. 


It is important to note before beginning that there is an important distinction 
between mind control and brainwashing—mind control is far more covert, 
whereas, in brainwashing, the prisoner or person being brainwashed is 
aware of it. When someone is using mind control, they are befriending the 
person, earning a position of trust, and using that trust in order to infiltrate 
the mind of someone else in order to create a brand-new personality type 
altogether. Effectively, then, this leads to several thoughts implanted in the 
individual’s mind without the individual knowing where they came from. If 
done successfully, there should be no way to really discern the thoughts 


from those that were implanted unnaturally. 


Mind control starts with the development of a relationship first and 
foremost. When that relationship is developed, the manipulator is able to 
get access to the other person’s mind. Of course, this takes time. The 
manipulator has to wait patiently for the victim to open up and render him 
or herself vulnerable. However, as soon as that relationship is built up, the 
manipulator can begin to take advantage. The manipulator can make it a 
point to engage in talking about topics, dropping just the right amount of 
hints to begin to infiltrate the mind of the other person. For example, if you 
really want your friend to like your music, you can spend the time to tell 
him how great the band is. The next day, subtly mention something about 
the band. Continue to do this, and after a while of hearing the same idea 
over and over again, the unconscious mind becomes more impressionable. 
You may then decide to play the music after a week or two of repeating that 
they are so great to your friend and find that your friend is super into the 
music. He may even ask you what the band is because it sounds so great. 
That is when you can drop it on him that he has been listening to that one 


particular band that you wanted to go see, and you can ask him to go with 


you. 


Using Mind Control 


3 Impl 
Build Lower self- mpana 
SSE Shea thoughts 
‘ repetition) 


Effectively, mind control will come with several steps that you must 
complete in order to be effective. You must first develop enough of a 
rapport with the other person to be a trusted individual. This is the part that 
takes the longest. The more genuine you can make the relationship seem, 
the more potent your skills will become. This means then that if you want to 
use this technique, you need to be in it for the long haul. Think about how 
so many manipulators make it a point to rush through the honeymoon 
stages at all costs—this is because they desperately want to be in that 
familiar, trusted position of power with the other party. When they are, they 
are effectively able to start working on the manipulation side quicker. Since 
people that are trusting of the manipulator are more susceptible to long-term 


manipulation, this is a preferred method. 


Upon becoming trusted, you must begin to lower the other person’s self- 
esteem somehow. People with higher self-esteem are harder to control just 
because they are too trusting of themselves. If you want to take out 
someone’s self-esteem, you must lead them to think that they should not 
trust themselves. You want them to feel like their own thoughts are 
inaccurate or not true to reality. You may find ways to subtly imply that the 
other person is not particularly intelligent, skilled, or otherwise capable in 


an attempt to make them feel like they should not even bother trying. 


As self-esteem lowers, you should have an easier time starting to implant 
your own thoughts into the mind of the other person. You may want the 
other person to actively associate a specific emotion with a certain 
consequence, and you can do that. You can condition the other person at 
this stage as well, using what is commonly referred to as NLP anchoring, 


which will be discussed more in Chapter 8. 


After repetition of the thoughts that you wish to install, you may see them 
beginning to take hold. Your friend may readily listen to that music that he 
hated before. The person that you were trying to make more agreeable to 
have a better shot at dating is beginning to feel more self-conscious and 


therefore far more susceptible to any attention. 


You may decide to install multiple thoughts or triggers to allow you to 
better control the other person. No matter the techniques that you chose, 
one thing is for sure—when you learn how to control the minds of other 
people, you learn how to take control of who they are. You can implant new 
interests. You can teach them to be loyal to you. You can convince them 
that they have always been interested in certain political affiliations. You 
can change who they are entirely, and they will have no idea how it 


happens. 


Effectively, you expose the other person to these changes so slowly over 
such as a long period of time that they believe that the changes in their 
thoughts are their own choices. 

Gaslighting 

Gaslighting is one of the more dangerous tactics that those with dark 


personalities employ. After all, what could possibly be more insidious than 


teaching someone that they cannot rely on who they are as an individual? 
When you are gaslighting someone, you are effectively teaching someone 


to doubt their own sanity. 


Have you ever found yourself in such a moment of self-doubt? Have you 
ever found yourself crippled into inaction because you cannot be sure if 
things happened the way you believe they happened or if you are 
overreacting? Maybe you tell yourself you are imagining the way an 
interaction went, or you think that there is no way possible that things 
happened the way you think they did. The manipulator wants to latch on to 
any doubt that you may have and take advantage of it. Over time, the 
manipulator can effectively make that wound of self-doubt fester and grow, 
slowly consuming your ability to trust yourself and eroding it away into 


nearly nothing. 


This process is incredibly dangerous—someone who cannot trust himself is 
not going to be particularly effective in dealing with other people. Think 
back to Anna—when she first started seeing signs of Ethan being someone, 
she thought he wasn’t, she asked him about it. “Why are you so grumpy 
now?” she may have asked at one point, only to be met with a quizzical 
look and a quiet response of, “What are you talking about?” Being met with 
something without aggressiveness, attention, or frustration is enough for 


Anna to wonder if it was all in her head. 


Along with those occasional attempts to derail her, he may also move her 
keys. Never far or hiding them entirely—but he would shift them from the 
pants she had worn that day to a pair that she had washed earlier in the 


evening, only to toss that same pair of pants back in the dirty laundry pile. 


She will go hunting for her keys, only to have Ethan say he thinks they are 
in the laundry and have her find the pants that she could have sworn she had 
hung up just hours earlier. 

He may quietly correct her when she tells a story, reminding her that the 
detail went a different way than she is reporting it. Did the story actually go 
that way? Probably not—but he is trying to discredit her in her own mind. 
That is all gaslighting is—it is a pervasive discrediting of the victim’s own 


trust in reality. 


Over time, the idea that Anna internalizes is that she is incapable of actually 
ever trusting herself. If she is ever asked anything, she is quick to defer to 
Ethan because she has taught herself that she is untrustworthy. This means 


that Ethan’s control over her increases as he continues to tighten his grip. 


In order to use this technique for yourself, you would simply start by 
discrediting something particularly harmless. You may move keys or check 
the mail early and pretend that your partner had checked it when they 
hadn’t. You may make it a point to tell your partner that the oven was left 
on when it wasn’t and more. Over time, you slowly up the ante. Over time, 
the stakes of whatever is going on increase more and more. You point out 
that your partner is driving to the wrong store and that you are going to one 
on the opposite side of town when your partner turns into the store you had 
agreed to go to. You may tell your partner that she forgot to pay all of her 
bills and that you paid them all for her, even though she was up late the 


night before doing so. 


Eventually, gaslighting gets so incredibly powerful that the victim could see 


a car go by and then you could deny that it had ever gone by. The victim 


would be willing to accept that as the truth simply because she has lost faith 
in herself. 


Isolation 

Another common manipulation tactic is isolation. People are social 
creatures—we are primarily happier and more fulfilled when we have some 
sort of interaction and relationships with other people. However, 
manipulators frequently find themselves feeling threatened by the idea of 
their victims having inner circles of friends and family members that cannot 
be controlled. The manipulator wants to retain full control of the victim, 
and as such, it becomes common to isolate the victim away from everyone 


else he or she ever knew and loved. 


It may start out as simple as voicing a displeasure about certain friends or 
family members. Over time, it may strengthen into something far worse— 
the individual may find that it is easier to cut off friends than it is to deal 
with the jealousy or pushback. The manipulator may make up stories about 
particularly problematic members of the victim’s inner circle, such as 
declaring that the best friend of the victim has been trash-talking the 
manipulator for the last week, even though the poor manipulator has done 


nothing wrong. Over time, the victim internalizes all of this—the victim 
begins to internalize this. If you are constantly told that the only person that 
could ever love you is a person that has been abusive to you for years, you 


may begin to believe that. 


If the manipulator plays his cards right, he becomes the only circle of 
support for the victim. This is intentional—if only the partner or spouse 
works, the victim is stuck at home with the children simply due to the 
prohibitive cost of childcare. If the victim wants to go out, there are always 
a million reasons why that cannot happen. Ultimately, the end result is the 
same—little to no support for the victim. Without support, the victim has no 
one to help. Moving out can be intimidating, or even just impossible 


depending on the situation. 


Isolating people is commonly done by making problems between the victim 
and those around him or her that the manipulator has facilitated. He may 
make it a point to call out the victim, telling her that she cannot possibly go 
out with those people because they are too promiscuous. The next time that 
they are going to a bachelorette party and I was told, “Oh, you know what? 
I feel really sick, and you’re going to need to take care of the baby.” There 


is always a reason, and over time, the individual victim loses credibility. 


Criticism 

Remember how a basic tenet of being able to control the mind of someone 
else was being able to damage their self-esteem? This is where you begin to 
do that. You are effectively going to be attempting to damage the other 


person’s self-esteem so much that they do not want to make choices for 


themselves. The criticism that you shower them in is enough to deter any 


decision making. 


When you want to criticize someone else, you need to figure out what their 
true weaknesses are. If they are commonly threatened by the idea of being a 
bad parent, you may latch onto that, throwing it in the victim’s face as much 
as possible. If you are working on a big project for school to get your 
master’s degree, you may find that your partner is suddenly telling you how 
dumb or stupid you are and that you will never make it. You may find that 
actually being able to proceed is next to impossible if you feel strongly and 


regularly criticized. 


The more criticized that you feel as well, the more likely that it is that you 
will fail. You will be distracted and all of your attempts to actually do better 
will likely suffer as well. When you are too busy or too afraid to take the 
leap in order to actually be successful. Your distraction will potentially cost 
you your degree, and that is exactly what the manipulator wants. The 
manipulator wants you to feel like being successful is an impossibility, 
because if you believe that it san impossibility, you will not try to leave. 
That means effectively, you are self-sabotaging without ever realizing it, all 


because of the constant criticism fed to you. 


Think back to Anna for a moment. Ethan criticized her regularly later in the 
relationship after having originally gotten Anna in the first place. He chose 
to behave poorly, telling Anna that she could never get the house clean like 
he expected, even though he is home all evening without helping. She is 
constantly asked why she cannot do anything right despite her best efforts, 
and over time, that critical worldview becomes her own. All that needed to 
happen was that Anna was repeatedly and ruthlessly exposed to the same 
manipulative propaganda over and over again reminding her of just how 


worthless she truly was. 


Now, was Anna particularly useless? Not at all—she has taken care of her 
child and also managed to work on school. However, she was not living up 
to Ethan’s impossible standards and he was not afraid to make her pay for it 
with his criticisms and sharp words. 

Fatigue 

Finally, the last manipulation tactic that we will discuss is fatigue. Have you 
ever felt so tired that you were convinced that you would drop dead or pass 
out at any point in time? Perhaps you stayed up extra late working on a 
project and never got to sleep overnight. Or maybe you had young children 
that woke up around the clock, indoctrinating you to the lack of sleep club 
that every young parent is introduced to. No matter the cause, think about 


how you felt after not getting enough sleep. 


You probably felt like you were lagging and like you could not think 
clearly. Despite all of the coffee that you had chugged throughout the day, 
you could not help but feel like you were ready to collapse soon. You found 


that you were far more ready to just go along with what your partner was 


telling you—if he says that you need to run to the store to buy something, 
you are willing to do so. If he decides that you need to clean up, you 


begrudgingly get up and do it in your half-asleep state. 


The reason that this happens is that over time, as you become more and 
more exhausted, your mind’s own mechanisms of being able to fight such 
influences begin to wane. It cannot defend itself if it is too exhausted to 
function, effectively. Instead, those safety mechanisms, or at least, the 
primary ones within your mind, malfunction. Instead of being able to fight 
back, you find that you simply agree because it is easier. You do not see the 


battle as being worth the little effort, so you agree. 


Fatigue is a commonly used tactic afros the board. It has been used to 
torture people into spilling information before. The studies of the brain have 
shown that as soon as you have been kept up for just 20 hours, you are 
already just as impaired as if you had drunk a beer or two instead. You need 
to be able to rest to keep your mind sharp so you can protect your body. 
When you are sleep deprived, then, you are susceptible to all sorts of 


dangerous and insidious abuse. 


All you have to do to make someone sleep deprived is actively prevent 
them from sleeping as long as you can. Try to find techniques that can be 
brushed off as being some sort of coincidence rather than intentional. You 
may turn on a light and then apologize and say you thought the other person 
was sleeping. Dose the other person with caffeine. Convince the other 
person to stay up late with you for some reason—perhaps you will be 


watching a movie together or something. 


Ultimately, no matter the method that you choose, you will find that you are 
able to gain covert control over the mind of others if you were to utilize the 
tactics within a relationship or with someone else. You can weaken the 
mind’s defenses. You can slip past them entirely undetected. You can 
convince people to believe false realities and more. The power of mind 
control is very real, but please remember that it is a dangerous ability that 
should not be taken lightly. 


Chapter 5: The Power of Persuasion 


Persuasion is incredibly powerful. When you can persuade someone to do 
something, you can usually get them to agree with whatever it is that you 
want them to do. If you want to get someone to go on a date with you, you 
can persuade them to do so. If you want someone to hire them, you want to 
be able to convince them that you deserve to be hired in the first place. If 


you want someone to help you, you want to persuade them. 


Persuasion occurs in nearly every aspect of life. It will be a prevalent aspect 
of nearly every interaction that you have with other people. So much as just 
suggesting to someone that you would like to go somewhere is a form of 
persuasion—it is the attempt to socially influence. This means that you are 
trying to get someone else to do something else, changing their behaviors in 


some way. 


When you can persuade someone else to do something, you have changed 
their behavior in a way that did not involve coercion or forcing them 
somehow. You effectively managed to convince them in a way that showed 
them exactly why you are right. Now, whether the method that you used 
was emotional versus being a legitimate attempt to logically convince 
someone else is up for debate, depending upon whether you feel that 


emotions are a valid justification method to use to convince someone else. 


As you read this far, you may have questions: What specifically is 
persuasion when referring to it in a psychological manner? How can you 
truly be persuasive? Why does it matter? Are there specific methods that 


usually or always work? Why do they work? 


It is normal to have these questions going through your mind. After all, if 
you now know that you can persuade people to do nearly anything, you 
may be wondering exactly how that persuasion can happen, and possibly 
even whether it is happening to you. The good news is that persuasion, 
specifically compared to manipulation, honors free will. This means that 
any attempts to persuade you are not necessarily coercive or threatening in 
any way. Instead, they will place a particular emphasis on truly wanting the 
other person to arrive at the solution on their own. That is what makes 


persuasion so effective—it is guiding the other person to make a decision. 


What is Persuasion? 


By definition, persuasion is an attempt to change either attitudes or 
behavior without duress. The persuasion usually comes in some sort of 
communication. Keep in mind that many different aspects interfere with 
behavior and attitude, which is why you can have some influential 
techniques such as brainwashing or mind control, but then also have 
persuasion. All are different forms of influence, and they all work in 


different manners. 


Keep in mind that not all communication is persuasive: In fact, you usually 
communicate for one of three reasons. These reasons are to persuade, to 
inform, or to entertain. Sometimes, you can sort of blur the lines between 
the two, such as using the information to persuade or persuading someone 
through humor to make the other person like you more. However, 
persuasion is its own distinct form of communication that should be treated 


as such. 


Consider for a moment that you want to convince your spouse to agree to 
take your annual vacation to Hawaii this year. You may be entirely 
determined to go to Hawaii, but you know that your partner prefers to go 
places that are far cooler. Keeping that in mind, you offer up all of the 
reasons that you would like to go. You inform your partner that you would 
like to get the sunlight to boost your vitamin D. You tell your partner that 
you have always wanted to go to Hawaii, or that you know that it is 
beautiful at that point in time. Your spouse eventually relents, though you 
know that your spouse is not going to be particularly happy on the trip. Is 


this a form of manipulation or persuasion? 


The answer is persuasion—there were no threats. There were no attempts to 
hide information. You were entirely forthcoming with everything, including 
what you were trying to do. Manipulation usually involves some sort of 
deception and covertness that you did not use when talking about Hawaii. 
You were not dropping constant subtle messages in hopes of subliminally 
communicating with your partner—you simply had an adult conversation 
with your partner about why you wanted to go to Hawaii, and your spouse 
loves you enough to agree, even if that means sacrificing what your spouse 


wants to do the most. 


This is normal persuasion and shows a normal sort of give-and-take in a 
relationship. The normalcy of this persuasion would be further emphasized 
if, the next time you are going on vacation, you consider what your partner 


wants over what you want yourself. 


Persuasion, then, becomes a valuable tool in many different contexts. It is 
critical in attempts to communicate with other people in order to get what 
you wanted or needed. It is beneficial when you are actively attempting to 
convince other people what you would like to do. It helps you lead people 
toward decisions that you believe will be helpful to them, such as if you are 
a leader that needs to be able to manage the abilities and actions of other 


people. 


When you are going to be persuading other people, you are going to be 
helping them make decisions, and this makes it powerful in advertising in 
particular. In fact, persuasion is so readily recognized that the study of it 
links back to the Middle Ages: Rhetoric, which you will be discussing 


shortly, was commonly used and taught in the university, and was taught to 


anyone who sought to become educated. 


Now, without further ado, let us look at two of the most common sets of 
persuasive techniques that you can find when you are trying to learn how to 
convince other people of nearly anything at all: the principles of persuasion 


and the art of rhetoric. 


Principles of Persuasion 


The principles of persuasion are commonly used, and you may even find 
that you actively use them without ever being aware of it. These are six 
common techniques that can be used in order to directly or subtly guide the 
thoughts of someone else in order to ensure that their thoughts align with 
what you want to push. This is not manipulative—it is taking advantage of 
psychology in ways that can be persuasive and convincing to nearly 
anyone. If the other person naturally makes the decision that they are 
inclined to make after hearing the persuasion, that is not an act of coercion 
and should be treated accordingly. 


When you are looking at the principles of persuasion, you are looking at six 
distinct techniques that can be used to persuade. These are social proof, 
reciprocity, commitment and consistency, authority, scarcity, and liking 
something or someone. These techniques can be incredibly convincing if 


you know how to use them effectively. 


At this point, it is time to delve into each of these techniques. You will be 
guided through what the technique is as well as how to use it, with a short 


example for each of the six. 


Reciprocity 


Cammitment and 
consistency 


Social proof 


of pg 


Authority 


Scarcity 


Authority 

Stop and consider for a moment: You have just gotten to your family’s 
holiday gettogether. You brought with you your favorite mayonnaise-based 
food, but in the rush and business of the kitchen, you realized that your dish 
got left out on the counter. You got to the meal at noon, and you realized 
that the food was still out at 5:30 when it was time to eat. Your great-aunt is 
telling you that the food is safe, and everyone will be fine if they eat it. 
Your brother, who is a professional chef, on the other hand, insists that it be 
thrown out because it not only sat out in a hot kitchen for 5.5 hours, but also 
however long it took you to get from your home to the potluck. Who do you 
believe? 


Naturally, you are going to lean toward believing the chef, who works with 
food on a daily basis and is up to date on the most current food safety rules. 
You are going to be inclined to believe the individual who has had to pass 
classes on food safety simply because you trust him more on matters like 
this. Have you ever stopped to consider why you would? The answer is 
simple: You view him on an authority when it comes to food. This is only 


natural—after all, he is a chef. 


In general, people tend to believe the people that they believe to be 
authority figures. While your great-aunt may have been an authority figure 
in your life at some point, you also recognize that she has a tendency to 
hoard and has a hard time throwing away any consumable, even if the use- 
by date has come and gone. Effectively, you do not trust her to be an 


authority on food. 


This is one of the simplest uses of the principles of persuasion: if you want 
to be persuasive, you need to make sure that you are an authority in some 
way. People are naturally more inclined to agree with an authority over 
someone who they do not see as particularly knowledgeable. This is natural 
—we tend to defer to people that we believe know what they are doing. 
This is exactly why we take the advice of doctors, lawyers, and mechanics 
around the world: We trust that they know what we do not, and most of the 


time, this is true. 


ae eet 


| — 


Scarcity 
Imagine that, at that holiday dinner, you all realize that someone has lost 
one of the pies that were brought for dessert. When dessert rolls around, 


you all realize that there is not enough pie to go around, even if you were to 


cut pieces into small amounts. Everyone would, at best, get a sliver of pie 
without much on their plate because of the lack of the pies that should have 


been present. 


Of course, now everyone is vying for one of the pieces of pie. They are 
suddenly deemed to be far more valuable than they otherwise would have 
been perceived for one reason: They are scarce. Not everyone can get a 
piece of pie, or at least, not everyone can get a piece of pie that would be 
satisfying, and because of that, everyone finds that that the pie must be far 


more desirable than it otherwise would have been viewed to be. 


This is the principle of scarcity. When something is in low demand, it is 
suddenly deemed to be far more valuable. While pie may not be a very 
high-ticket item to use as an example, the point still stands: The less is 


there, the more it is wanted. 


Consider instead that you are a car salesperson. You need to be able to sell 
this car in order to get a bonus the following month, which is where you 
make most of your money. Now, imagine that the person that you are 
talking to does not seem convinced. They seem to feel like making a higher 
down payment is in their best interest, which it is, practically speaking. 


However, you really need to land that sale, so you offer a deal. 


You tell the person buying that if they are willing to buy the car that night, 
that they will get a steal of a deal—the deal that you are offering, however, 
expires that night and they need to make a decision sooner rather than later. 
The added pressure pushes the buyer over the edge from debating it to 


agreeing to do so for one reason: That deal was made scarce. 


People are risk aversive. They are far more likely to agree to something 
with a guaranteed payout than risk not having such a good deal in the 
future. The act of being able to save money now guaranteed seems far more 
convincing than potentially saving more money in the long run if they were 
to wait to have a larger down payment on their car, and they will use that 


logic to guide their decision. 


When you want to appeal to scarcity, then, you want to make sure that you 
make the other person feel like they need to make a decision sooner rather 
than later. They will usually err on the conservative side and take advantage 


of the deal presented to them. 


Social Proof 

Do you remember how in childhood, you were often told not to do 
something just because your friends were doing it? It turns out there is a 
good reason for that suggestion—people are far more likely to make a 
decision to follow the lead of other people if they do not know what to 


expect or what to do. 


In an unfamiliar environment or when under stress, people are more likely 
to follow the lead of those that they can relate to in some way. This means 
that if you need to convince or persuade someone to do something, you 
want to make sure that their peers are available to show them what to do, 


effectively. 


Think about the holiday gatherings that you attended as a child: Did you 
typically copy what the slightly older kids were doing? Did you pick up on 


their behaviors? People learn through exposure, and that is what makes it so 


powerful. Think about toddlers who will copy the swear words of their 
parent, or the preteen who picks up smoking just because their peers are, 
even if they are not particularly interested in doing so. It is not weakness 
that makes us do these things, but rather the tendency of people to naturally 


learn from those around them. 


Imagine that you are still selling cars. You discover that people are far more 
likely to agree to something if you tell them that their peers also often agree 
to buy that one particular car for some reason. If it is a young family, you 
may point out that many people with young children really like the features 
such as being able to swing their feet under the license plate to open the 
trunk, or being able to start their car remotely when they are inside, 
finishing up the final preparations before leaving, all because it makes life 
so much more convenient when you are already toting a couple of tiny 


humans that inherently make everything about travel more difficult. 


After all, when you are traveling with toddlers, you must consider whether 
everyone has gone to the bathroom, if they are wearing clothing that is safe 
in their car seat, whether you have their snacks and toys, as well as a change 
of clothes present and so much more. You emphasize all of this, and you 
find that your sales pitches become far more effective in the long run, all 
because you make it clear that other parents also like cars with those 


features. 


Liking 
Another common usage of persuasion is through the principle of liking 
someone or something. We naturally tend to be persuaded more by those 


that we enjoy simply because if we are going to be going through the effort 


to help someone else, we are going to do it because we genuinely want to 
help. This means then that if you want to convince someone to help you do 
something, or to obey what you are suggesting, you want to make yourself 


likable to you. 


Making someone like you can happen almost instantly in several fashions. 
You can make yourself quickly liked through simply making it a point to 
mirror someone, similar to a technique common to NLP. You can also go 
through the process of intentionally making someone like you through a 


three-step process. 


This three-step process is quite simple: You must make yourself relatable 
somehow, you must offer a compliment, and you must make yourself seem 
like team. This works for several reasons—when you are relatable, you are 
automatically seen as more human than you were just a moment ago. 
Consider just how many people you interact with on a regular basis: How 
many of them are you able to actively remember? Can you remember who 
helped you at the grocery store, or who you passed by at work? Unless you 
have some sort of super memory, chances are, you do not remember. 
However, if you can make yourself relatable somehow, you will be more 
memorable and more persuasive. Because you see so many people 


throughout the day, you tend to forget that they are people and not just blurs 


that you pass. In changing that, you automatically want to give them more 


Compliment 
the other Beateam 
person 


attention. 


When you compliment the other person, you make a specific association 
between yourself and the other person: That you are a source of good 
feelings. This does begin to toe the line into emotional manipulation for 
some people—it is intentionally triggering the feelings of very specific 
feelings for a very specific purpose, and for that reason, you should at least 
make sure that whatever compliment you offer, it is a legitimate one that 
you meant. If you did not mean the compliment and only said it to get them 
to like you, you are likely to do the exact opposite: instead of being seen as 


likable, you will be seen as manipulative, and poorly so. 


Finally, you want to establish that you and the other person are a team. In 
doing so, you trigger that camaraderie that is necessary for successful 
persuasion. When they feel like you are on the same team, they are far less 
likely to try to guard against you simply because they do not see you as a 
threat. Because of this, you then become far more capable of persuasion. 
Their minds will be more open and accepting because they do not think that 


you will try to take advantage of them. 


Now, go back to that example of selling something to someone. Imagine 
that your next client walks in with a young child in tow. You settle down at 
your dest to talk to the other person, and in doing so, you offer the child a 
bucket of toys that you keep in a drawer for just that occasion—you know 
that children get antsy when stuck at a desk for longer than about 2.5 
seconds. You smile as you offer the toys and comment offhandedly that you 
have a child about that age at home too and that it is always tough to get 
through appointments, so you have made it a point to have your own toys 
present just in case. You have now naturally offered a tidbit about yourself, 


and that has made you more relatable. 


Next, you wait a bit. After a little while of working, you make a comment 
about how the child is incredibly well behaved and that the client has done 
a great job with them. This makes the client feel good and they will be 


happy. 


Finally, you point out that you are happy to help them, or you tell them to 
help you help them. This establishes that teamwork that you need in order 


to convince them to do what you need. 


Consistency and Commitment 

The next principle of persuasion is consistency and commitment—people 
are usually inclined to remain consistent to their commitments for one 
reason: Being consistent makes you reliable. People want to be viewed as 
reliable because being reliable is powerful—it is valued greatly and if you 
can make people see you as reliable, they will continue to go back to you. If 
you are a reliable salesperson, for example, other people will repeatedly go 
back to you to make their purchases because they trust you. If you reliably 
pay back your loans, your credit goes up and people are more likely to give 


you loans in the future as well. 


Because people want to be reliable, they will usually follow the same 
pattern of answering and offering to help over and over again. For example, 
if you ask your best friend to babysit your kids one night for the weekend 
and they agree, you may find that they are more likely to continue to 
babysit your kids regularly every weekend because they have already 
agreed to do so once, and they want to continue to agree in order to be seen 


as consistent. They will then continue to babysit when asked because they 


do not see it as a strain or as a problem. Eventually, however, it seems less 
like occasional childcare and more like it is happening daily and must 
continue. That friend is going to likely continue to babysit without a 


complaint until it becomes a problem because they want to be consistent. 


All you need to do to take advantage of this principle is get someone to 
agree with you on one point before asking for something else. A common 
tactic for this is to ask someone for a pen to get them into a mindset of 
saying yes instead of no, and they are more likely to continue to say yes in 


the future. 


Reciprocity 

Finally, the last principle of persuasion is reciprocity. To understand this 
principle, imagine how you feel obligated to offer someone else something 
in return after they have given you something. If someone offers to help 
you, you try to reciprocate in some way. For example, if your friend gives 
you a birthday present, you feel like you are inclined to offer them a present 


in return on their birthday as well. 


This works for a very specific reason: People are inherently hardwired to 
want to return the acts of altruism for them. Did your friend giving you 
something or helping you actually benefit them in any way other than to 
make them happy? Chances are, it did not, but them giving to you in the 
first place can be enough to get you to continue to give to them in the 
future. Effectively, they guarantee that you will make it a point to provide 


for them if they were to need it because they have given to you. 


When you want to use the art of reciprocation, think not what they can do 
for you, but rather what you can do for them. Ask what they need you to do 


before you go making demands and you may be surprised to see the result. 


Rhetoric 


Another line of thoughts surrounding the art of persuasion is rhetoric. This 
is literally the art of being persuasive in the first place, and if you can 
master this, you will be able to use these tools in general conversation. 
These techniques have been passed down since the middle ages, and if they 
have continued to be relevant, then they must be useful, at least in some 


Capacity or another. 


Ultimately, rhetoric has several requirements. You must be able to control 
language and know the culture within which you are working. Further, you 
must understand the rhetorical situation, which will determine what you are 
trying to do, your audience, the topic, how you will speak, and context. This 
all combines together to create the rhetoric that you will be discussing. 


The purpose for your situation will be acknowledging why you are writing 
or talking. What are you trying to do? Then, you must figure out what you 
are discussing—the topic. This should determine what you are trying to 
inform or persuade about. You should be broad enough to be able to work 
with this, while also being narrow enough that you have a very specific 
purpose in doing so. Next, you must look into the audience—the person that 


you are addressing. You may find that this is the hardest to work with, as 


you will not be able to fully control the audience. You cannot possibly get 
everyone to do what you want on a whim, and because of that, you need to 
do your best to work with the audience that you have rather than the one 
you want. Finally, you have the writer: This is the person doing the 
persuasion. What are you bringing to the table? Why are you discussing 


what you are discussing? How is it relevant to you? 


With the situation identified, you are free to begin addressing the three 


appeals of rhetoric: Logos, Ethos, and Pathos. 


Logos 

Logis is an appeal to logic. At its simplest, it is figuring out how to 
convince your audience that there is no other option but to agree with you 
on what you are saying. Oftentimes, this takes advantage of statistics or 
other facts in order to get the point across. You want to make an argument 


that is so strong, the audience feels no choice but to agree with it. 


For example, imagine that you are trying to persuade someone to buy that 
car you were really pushing for. At this point, you begin talking about all of 
the statistics that mean that the car that you are discussing is safer. You may 
pull up crash ratings, or how statistically they save more on gas than 
compared to other cars. You are trying to bombard the other person with so 
much information that it is undeniable—the best option available is to buy 


the car, regardless of personal opinion. 


Ethos 
Ethos is an appeal to character. Unlike an appeal to logic, you are trying to 


make yourself sound persuasive and trustworthy. In advertisement, consider 


the fact that people tend to use celebrities in order to win people over. If 
you see your favorite celebrity, who you personally admire, drinking a 
certain type of coffee or wearing a certain kind of shoe, you are going to 
feel more inclined to do the same simply because you want to identify with 


that celebrity. 


You may also do this to show that you are trustworthy on a science— 
perhaps you make it clear that you have spent your entire life focusing on 
that one particular study that you have finally accomplished. Emphasizing 
that trustworthiness is a great way to make sure that other people will be 


willing to listen to you as you talk. 


Think of this as using an appeal to authority—you are listing out anything 


about yourself that will make you seem trustworthy and worthy of being 


Pathos 

Finally, the last of the appeals of rhetoric is Pathos: An appeal to emotion. 
When you are using an appeal to emotion, you are using emotion to drive 
the individual forward. You want to make an emotional connection of some 
way to actually get the audience to feel what you want them to feel.! When 
you are able to claim and use their emotions, you will find that you are able 


to convince them to do something. 


This is for one specific reason: your emotions are meant to be motivating. 
When you can use the emotions of other people, you can compel them to do 
a lot. For example, if you are needing to get people to donate to your cause, 


you mention some of the people that your cause will be helping. Perhaps 


you tell success stories of people that have been helped by your foundation. 


When you do this, people feel moved to act. 


When you want to use pathos, you want to make sure that you identify the 
emotional response that you want to take advantage of, and then you figure 
out how best to trigger that emotional response in the other party. Doing so 
can usually get the other person to do what you are aiming for. Think of 
how commercials for charities will use photos of starving children and 
puppies and kittens that look miserable. This is because these pictures are 
sadness-evoking—they will trigger the individual to feel sad, and in feeling 


sad, they can call for those donations that they want to see. 


Chapter 6: Brainwashing 


Have you ever wondered why brainwashing got so popular in media? You 
may see it in cartoons or as the plot point to an incredibly popular movie or 
book for adults. It seems like it is commonly used as a device to scare those 
that are consuming the media, as a sort of creepy, grotesque attempt to 


make them feel compelled to keep reading while also being terrified. 


While the concept of brainwashing is nowhere near as grotesque as it can 
become in entertainment, sometimes involving serums, spells being cast, 
possession, or other such tactics, it is still a very real occurrence in 
psychology. In particular, brainwashing is commonly seen in situations such 


as cults and prisoners of war. 


This is not the kind of sudden triggering of perfect obedience that it may 
seem to be in media, but rather something brutal and traumatizing. As you 
read through this chapter, keep in mind that brainwashing is not something 
that should be treated lightly. This is one of the most insidious methods of 
control over someone else simply due to the harm that it can trigger. If you 
are attempting to brainwash someone, you must remember that the only 
ways that can utilize this technique are largely abusive and sometimes 
illegal. If you choose to utilize these methods, you are acknowledging that 
you are taking that risk for yourself. It is strongly recommended that you 
avoid these techniques but understanding how it works is still something 


that is important. 


What is Brainwashing? 


Brainwashing itself has a definition of creating new beliefs within someone 
else that are typically radically different from the original ones. These 
techniques almost always involve the use of coercion. If you were to 
simplify this definition, you would say that it is the act of forcing people to 
comply and internalize a new internal belief system through coercion. The 


entire purpose of this technique is entirely to force people to change. 


It involves the act of attacking someone else’s identity so thoroughly that 
you are eventually able to systematically erase or repress it. This almost 
always requires some level of traumatic abuse and guilt over an extended 
period of time in order to truly get it to work. This is precisely why you 
should avoid ever using this against other people—you would effectively be 
intentionally and maliciously destroying a person’s very being in order to 
create your own identity for that person. That is so incredibly harmful, and 
you should make it a point to ensure that it does not happen. 


+ 
S 


S 


Why Brainwash? 


Brainwashing happens for several reasons. People will use the art of 
brainwashing in order to indoctrinate people into cults. Typically, these dark 
cults demand complete and utter obedience, and if you cannot gain absolute 
control over someone, you are usually going to have a hard time getting 
people to stick around long enough to actually actively be abused in any 
way. In particular, one of the most well-known abusive cults that had 
brainwashed and completely indoctrinated the members was the cult of Jim 
Jones—he convinced his entire cult to drink cyanide and kill themselves 


and their children. 


Other times, it is commonly used during war—when militaries take 
prisoners of war, they may intentionally brainwash them in an attempt to get 
the people to break down and obey under any and all situations. For 
example, during the 1950s, the Chinese made it a point to subject several 
American soldiers to their processes of brainwashing before sending them 
back to the US. The people then completely denounced their own cultures 


and personalities, touting the importance and benefits of the world in China. 


Even more often, you can see brainwashing in cultures such as North 
Korea, through propaganda and attempts to keep everyone involved 
compliant and willing to obey. When these people are subjected to constant 
abuse with constant feedback about how their leader is the best leader and 
that they must be perfectly obedient, they develop those beliefs as their 


Own. 


What is important to note here is that these brainwashing attempts are not 


hidden—the people involved will be entirely aware of what is happening to 


them. However, what is unique is the fact that they still comply anyway. By 
and large, when people do know that they are being coerced or manipulated, 
they are usually able to distance themselves from it. This is not the case 
with brainwashing—the new identity is typically taken simply because the 
individual wants to stop some sort of egregious abuse that is happening that 
is too painful or too much to bear. Rather than continuing to suffer, the 
individual instead makes it a point to give in, allowing for the creation of 


the new personality simply for survival. 


This however also adds one extra facet—you can reverse brainwashing, 
though the guilt will remain. Prisoners exposed to this sort of abuse do 
eventually revert back to more or less who they were before—they may be 
terrified of their identity at first, but over time, they become more and more 
willing to accept who they are as an individual and renounce that old 


personality created in brainwashing. 


Steps to Brainwashing 


Despite the fact that the art of brainwashing is so incredibly insidious, if 
you are able to take advantage of this process, you will find that it is far 
easier than it seems. It does not take much to entirely break down a person’s 
mind, so long as you have no qualms about utterly decimating the 
personality of someone else. If you are not afraid of destroying someone 
else, you will find that with just a handful of steps, that person can be 
destroyed and brainwashed. Of course, that does not mean that it is a quick 
process—it does take a significant amount of time to truly dismantle the 
mind of someone else. You will need to have the time, space, and blatant 
disregard for the law and other human life to take advantage of this 


Assault on ra s 
TARO eal Guilt Self-betrayal 
identity 


technique. 


Leniency 


Breaking point 


Final 


confession 


Brainwashing is impossible if the individual that is being brainwashed is 


Assault on Identity 


not willing to let go of who they are as a person. This means that the first 
stage of brainwashing is convincing them that they should not like the 


person that they are. In particular, you will spend time assaulting their 
identity in hopes of convincing them that their identity is problematic in 
some way. Effectively, you want to make them fear who they are and 
everything they value. 


For example, you may ask someone what their name is. If they answer with 
their name, you punish them severely and tell them that their name is 
something else. For example, imagine that the person’s name is Bill. He 
tells you that, and in response, you brutally beat him across the back with a 
board and then tell him that his name is Larry now. Every time that you ask 
him about his past, his identity, or anything else close to him and he answer 
truthfully, you would then beat him in order to make him fear the truth. You 
are effectively teaching him to fear the act of being honest with other 
people about who he is and because he does fear it, he is not likely to 


continue to repeat the mistake over and over. 


Guilt 

Next, it is time to instill guilt. As the other person is constantly being 
penalized for who they are, they effectively must be convinced that the 
abuse is their own fault. Maybe it was a fault of their culture or their family, 
or it was simply them as a person. You want them to effectively feel like 
they are responsible for their beatings and imprisonment, and you will get 
this through repetition. You will add more onto their plate as well—you 
may blame them for the fact that it is not sunny that day, or that something 
unrelated to him has happened. You want to lay on as much guilt as possible 


so the individual rejects themselves in favor of being able to reject the guilt. 


Self-Betrayal 


Soon, the guilt will build up, as will the fear of torture if they continue to 
stand by who they are, and the individuals being brainwashed will find that 
it is easier to simply betray their identities than it is to stay true to 
themselves. They decide that they would rather break away from who they 
are as people in order to protect their lives, as they have reached a point of 
knowing that death will arrive if they are not careful. They would rather 
betray themselves, satisfying the fact that they need to survive, and they 


obey and submit. 


Breaking Point 

Upon denouncement of who they were as a person, the people being 
brainwashed find that they have hit their breaking point—they feel like they 
have lost all hope. They have accepted their new life and know that fighting 
back is futile. This is the beginning of the adoption of the new life that has 
been presented to them, as at that point, to the one being brainwashed, the 
choices are to assimilate or die, and they have already rejected who they 
once were. They officially give up at this stage and recognize that they will 
have no choice but to accept the new thoughts or cultures if they wish to 


survive. 


Leniency 

Next comes a ray of hope—someone that has been torturing the person 
being brainwashed to the brink of death, when he feels like he cannot 
possibly cope any longer, offers some sort of leniency. It may be a bit extra 
food, or a cigarette, or even just a kind word. It is then that hope is dangled 
in front of the individual and is seen as a legitimate option. The individual 
will latch onto that trust, seeing it as proof that they can, in fact, survive, if 


they play their cards right, and they latch onto that. The manipulator has 


officially won the trust of the one being brainwashed, and they begin to 
accept that all of the pain of torture will go away as soon as they are willing 


to give in and comply entirely. 


Compulsion to Confess 

At this point, the guilt becomes too unbearable for the individual—he feels 
like he cannot hold it in any longer and he feels that the only option is 
confession. He is driven to let go of that previous life and let’s go of it all. 
The manipulator, of course, encourages this, and soon, confessions are 
flying for anything possible. Even things that are not the fault of the 


brainwashed are confessed for in order to let go of all of that guilt. 


Progress and Harmony 

After that initial confession, the individual is slowly taught and assimilated. 
This stage is the education of the new identity and culture. People are 
encouraged to let go of the past. They agree to go along with what they are 
being taught out of fear of being returned to the past, in which they are 
treated poorly. Instead, they are given many basic human decencies to 


encourage them to continue to make their positive progress in their life. 


Final Confession 

Eventually comes the final confession—this is the stage at which they 
finally give up who they are for real. They are willing to renounce it all, 
seeing the beauty in what they have been taught and finding that they 
identify with the culture that has taken them in. They are willing to continue 
to coexist in this new social bubble and are willing to get in as soon as 


possible. 


Rebirth 

Finally comes the rebirth—at this stage, the prisoners are released. They are 
no longer being manipulated, simply because they already have been. 
Instead, they are indoctrinated and welcomed into the new society. While 
they are usually eager to get involved with the new life and the new people, 
they may be met with hesitation as people still see them as betrayers and 
foreigners. There is no amount of naming and ceremony, after all, that 
would allow the general population in that new circle to accept that they are 
the new person. Despite all of the effort that went into brainwashing, the 
general public still wishes to keep their distance, leaving the brainwashed 


remaining just as isolated as before. 


Chapter 7: Deception 


Have you ever felt the pressing need to lie to someone? Perhaps you felt 
like someone in your inner circle was actively lying to you, but you lacked 
the evidence that you needed to prove it beyond that sneaking suspicion that 
whatever was being said was a lie. No matter how certain you were, no one 


believed you and you were brushed off as being too sensitive or paranoid. 


What if you could develop the ability to identify the signs of that deception 
so you could call it out in the moment? Any time that you had those gut 
feelings that something was wrong, you would be able to point out exactly 
what it was that caused it. You would be able to tell exactly when you were 
lied to, in order to point out to yourself that you were not, in fact, crazy. 
You can end the constant self-gaslighting and instead work to eliminate the 
deceivers that are hiding behind their masks, presenting you with one thing 


while actually intending something entirely different. 


What if you wanted to be deceptive? Sometimes, there is a good reason to 
be, even if it is not always the most ethical option. Sometimes, it is a good 
thing to convince someone else of something that is untrue, such as if you 
want to surprise someone for their birthday. If you want to surprise them, 
you can make it a point to know exactly how to skirt around the truth to 


keep that surprise under wraps until the big day. 


Keep in mind that while this chapter discusses deception in-depth, it should 
never be used nefariously. It is incredibly unethical to be lying about what 


is happening or why it is occurring, and the information provided here is for 


informative purposes only in order to aid in the identification of lying. 


There is no condoning of deception. 


Defining Deception 

Deception itself is a form of distorting the truth in some way. The truth is 
often dramatized, avoided, or simply lied about to convince the other person 
of what is being said, and in doing so, some sort of lie or deception is used 
to disguise it. It can range from deliberately avoiding answering the 
question or distracting from the question at hand, such as answering a 
question with another question, and then answering that question. It could 
be deliberately misconstruing the truth somehow, such as reporting 
causation as correlation despite not having the evidence to support that 
claim. It could even be simply saying something that is patently untrue. 
What is true, however, is that deception is wrong. It can even be illegal in 
several instances, such as in false advertising. If you are deceiving others, 


you are putting not only yourself, but also other people, at risk. 


Despite the unethicality of deception as a general rule, it is used in several 
different contexts on a regular basis. It is regularly used in order to win 
favor, such as in politics, for example. In particular, in politics, politicians 
will regularly use ambiguity to avoid truly answering the question at hand 
when they know that the answer to the question will be condemning in 


some way, shape, or form. 


Sometimes, people lie for abusive purposes. People like the narcissist will 
lie about who they are as a person in order to win favor from their targets 
with ease. They will pretend to be someone that they are not solely because 
they know that it will help them in the long run. If they pretend to be 


someone else, they are certain that they will actually attract the person in, 


and they can continue to lie about who they are. They effectively create a 


mask to wear to help themselves become the person that they need to be. 


Other times, people use deception to hide something, such as making sure 
that their partners do not find out that they are cheating on them. Ultimately, 
people will lie if they think that it will benefit them. Despite the fact that so 
many people are so willing to lie, it does not come as naturally as one may 
think. Lying actually puts a huge strain on the individual at hand. When you 
lie, your body is unhappy— it naturally releases stress hormones, and it 
changes how body language is presented. This means that if you are able to 
read those changes in behavior and state of mind, you can start to figure out 


whether someone is lying or not at a glance. 


Types of Deception 


Deception comes in several forms, depending upon how the individual 
needs to lie in the first place and what the truth that is being hidden is. 
Ultimately, people will use whatever method works best for them, but at the 
end of the day, there are several different forms that deception can take. 
These forms are important to understand in order to both recognize the 
deception as it happens, and also how to use deception as well. As you read 
through the next several sections, keep in mind that you can use these 
techniques yourself if you are truly certain that you would like to make use 


of the deceptive powers that are shown to you. 


Lying 

Perhaps the most well-known form of deception is lying. When someone 
thinks of someone else deceiving them, it is usually some sort of lie meant 
to mislead someone. This is also the most blatant destruction of the truth. It 
is the creation of a new sort of truth altogether—when you lie to someone, 
you are creating a new narrative with a new truth that may or may not even 


resemble the truth by the time it is spoken. 


When you are lying, you are literally making something new up that is 
unrelated to the truth. It is as simple as coming up with something new to 
tell the other person. For example, imagine that you really want to go hang 
out with your best friend who happens to be someone your partner is very 
insecure about. You may tell your partner that you are going to the movies 
with a completely different friend altogether to have an excuse to get out of 


the house during the period of time that you will be with the friend that you 


know your partner would be upset about. You have told a blatant lie in order 


to avoid the fight that you know would otherwise arise. 


Equivocation 

Equivocation occurs when you make your answers vague intentionally. You 
are intentionally hoping that the other person will be so thrown off track by 
the answers that you give that the truth will be ignored. This is commonly 
used in politics in particular, in which the politician may answer an entirely 
different question with wording that is just ambiguous enough to sort of 
give the impression of giving the most favorable answer possible without 
ever committing to that one particular answer. It is secretive in an entirely 


different manner when compared to lying. 


For example, imagine that you tell your partner that you are going out for 
the night. Your partner then, naturally, asks you where you are going. You 
say that you are going to watch a movie with a friend and leave it at that as 
you walk ou the door. Your partner may think that you meant going to the 
movie theater with someone, when in reality, you are going to that one 
person’s house that makes your partner self-conscious and nervous. You 
will still put on a movie at some point, so you are not lying, as you went to 
watch a movie with a friend, but you were not forthcoming with pertinent 


information that likely would have raised red flags for your partner. 


Omission 
Omission is the act of deliberately leaving out pertinent information that 
should have been included in the original statement. It is designed to hope 


that the individual does not press on that one particular issue in the hopes 


that the person will instead focus on what was said instead of wondering 


what went unsaid altogether. 


Omissions are dangerous because not every person is going to think to 
probe every line of questioning that needs to happen. Most people will 
simply take things at face value, and that is exactly what this person is 
hoping will happen. When information is taken at face value, the end result 
is the deception going entirely unchallenged, meaning that it was 
successful. Of course, it is always possible that the other person will probe, 


meaning you would need to segue into another form of deception as well. 


For example, the example for equivocation still counts for omission as well. 
Not only is the information that was offered ambiguous, it was also 
incomplete, leaving a massive hole to fill in. This is what makes it a lie by 
omission—the left-out information would have been pertinent to making a 


properly informed decision at the end of the day. 


Overstatements 

Sometimes, people use overstatements in ways that are intended to be 
comical—they are tongue-in-cheek attempts to make fun of oneself and are 
used specifically for fun. For example, someone may say that they were 
dying after that long workout. Were they really dying? Nope—they added it 


for dramatic flair, despite the fact that it is untrue. 


However, sometimes, the overstatement is used in ways that are meant to be 
deceptive. Typically, these deceptions are meant to play the victim or 
martyr—the individual makes it sound like they did far more than was 


asked of them and far more than was intended, and after that, they felt the 


need to go out of their way to prove all of the ways that they did way more 
than they needed to. As they talk about how exhausted they were, or how 
much it interfered with their schedule, they are over-exaggerating to look 


like the victim or the martyr that is deserving of favor. 


Understatements 

As a perfect opposite to overstatement comes the understatement. Just like 
how overstatements can be used comically, so too can understatements. 
However, sometimes, people will use the understatement to deceive others 
as well. Typically, this is involving the amount that someone had to do with 
something, such as someone not wanting to take credit for throwing a 
birthday party at the office, or they want to make something seem like less 


of a big deal than it actually was. 


For example, imagine that you accidentally backed into a light pole when 
you were driving—there is a massive dent in the middle of your back 
bumper, and your partner is furious. You may understate the damage, saying 
that it is fine and that your insurance will just cover the cost of the items so 


you may as well just not bother fixing it. 


Detecting Deception 


Now, with all those forms of deception above, you may be wondering how 
you can ever be certain of whether or when someone else is lying to you. 
Luckily, there are some simple steps that you can follow in order to figure it 
out. In general, you are going to want to practice analysis—discovering 
what is going on in the other person’s mind through learning to recognize 
all sorts of nonverbal cues. In learning those nonverbal cues, you will find 
that understanding and learning what other people are thinking is actually 
far easier than it may otherwise seem. 

Keep in mind that this process does involve a steep learning curve, and if 
you want to become a master at identifying attempts at deception, you will 
want to take the time to learn more about analyzing behavior. In doing so, 
you will have a massive amount of information to compare to in order to 


figure out the truth. 


Before you begin to identify whether someone is lying, you must figure out 
what their base, honest behavior is. This is because people’s body language 
will vary from person to person based on mood, temperament, and 
environment, so you need to have a solid baseline to compare it to. For 
example, people who are on the timid side may show that they are nervous, 
but most of the time it is literally just nerves rather than any true reason to 


be nervous, such as being deceptive. 


With the baseline figured out, it is time to look for behavior that deviates 
from that baseline as you talk. If you can pick up deviations and they fit the 
bill for common behavioral clusters of people that are deceptive, you may 


be on to something and you should absolutely spend the time looking into 


things. If you do not recognize any lying behaviors, you may be better off 


just rejecting the attempts to identify what is going on after all. 


In general, there are several important cues to remember as nonverbal cues 


to deception, such as: 


e Answering questions that were unasked 

e Answering questions with questions 

e Not correcting oneself during conversation out of fear of instilling 
doubt 

e Faking a lack of memory 

e A report of what did not happen rather than a focus on what did 

e Figuring out some way to justify what has happened, even when 
not necessary 

e Have some sort of exact alibi for exactly what they could not 
explain otherwise. 

e Use less words than others 

e Describe actions weakly and passively 


e Focused on the weaknesses in others 


Chapter 8: NLP Mind Control 


Have you ever interacted with someone before and found that, inexplicably, 
you were beginning to have strange and powerful temptations about what to 
do next? Perhaps you felt like you needed to do something that you would 
ordinarily never bother with, or you find that your emotions seem to be 
strangely all over the place, despite the fact that you should have been able 


to manage them well enough. 


There may be an explanation for this: Neuro-Linguistic processing. This is 
a particularly powerful set of actions. Words, and behaviors in order to 
trigger other people into obedience. Effectively, you will be able to access 
and interact with the other person’s mind, quietly and subtly controlling 


their mind in ways that were likely entirely unexpected. 


NLP practitioners vary from people genuinely interested in helping 
someone else in the world out to people with no other intention but to 
manipulate and harm others. In particular, these techniques are incredibly 
difficult to identify, and in not being able to figure them out, you may find 
that more and more of your behavior changes over time. For that reason, it 
is incredibly critical that you develop the ability to understand exactly what 
NLP is and how it works. Not only will you be able to wield these tools 
yourself if you so choose, you will also be able to identify ways that the 


usage of these behaviors can be beneficial to everyone 


What is Neuro-Linguistic Processing? 


Ultimately, NLP is the ability to learn how to communicate effectively with 
the unconscious mind of either yourself or of others. When you can access 
the unconscious mind of someone else, you are effectively learning to 
bypass all of the checks and balances in place to ensure that they are able to 
retain free will. In particular, you are learning to become a translator 
between the conscious and unconscious minds. The conscious and 
unconscious mind both really struggle to interact meaningfully with each 
other—one wants one thing, but the other cannot quite understand the 
request. In the end, wires seem to get crossed, and no one is happy with 


what has happened, how it happened, or what ends up being the end result. 


However, with NLP, you can learn to speak that language of the 
unconscious mind. NLP looks to identify the ways that you can do just that 
in order to make sure that the unconscious mind is actively communicated 
with in ways that are meaningful and important. This means that you will 
be able to ensure that the conscious and unconscious mind are working in 


tandem with each other. 


This is important because, as is commonly said in NLP, the conscious mind 
works out the actions and what is wanted while the unconscious mind is 


tasked with ensuring that the goals and actions actually happen. 


Stop and think about what the unconscious mind does for a moment—it is 
responsible for taking care of any and all automatic actions throughout the 
day. You do not think about driving—your unconscious mind does it for 


you. You do not think about how to brush your teeth—your unconscious 


does that too. Basically, your unconscious mind goes through all of the 
motions, making sure that you are doing exactly what you need to get 
through your day with the least amount of effort possible. It wants to 
reserve valuable conscious mind real estate for issues that are actually 
important, such as making an important decision on which job to apply for 
or how to go about achieving that difficult goal that you have planned out. 
Because there is only so much that can be fit into the conscious mind, the 
unconscious takes over for you. It allows you to run on autopilot for all of 
those tedious actions that you must get through during the course of your 
day. Without the unconscious mind, you would find that you need to decide 


and consciously focus on brushing your teeth, buckling up, and more. 


NLP to Control Minds 


If the unconscious mind is what takes care of all of your automatic, habitual 
behaviors, then, you may wonder why that is what NLP seeks to target. This 
is a great question—and there is a very simple answer. The unconscious 
mind is responsible for emotions. Emotions are unconscious reactions to the 
world around you. You do not choose to feel happiness or anger; it just 


happens. However, emotions are incredibly motivating. 

Your thoughts that underlie everything influence those emotions. Your 
emotions then influence your behaviors. If you want to control behaviors, 
you want to be able to alter emotions, and it just so happens to be that the 


easiest way to alter emotions is through figuring out how to directly tap into 


the thoughts of someone else. 


Thoughts 


When you tap into the unconscious mind, then, you are able to mess around 


with that sequence. You can figure out how to create new thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors, all because you are bypassing the conscious mind and 
interacting with the unconscious. Since the unconscious will almost never 


actually be acknowledged by the conscious in the moment, this is the best 


way to directly and simply interact with the other person to avoid raising 
red flags. 


When you use NLP, you are using a process that has been used for years 
primarily in a therapeutic sense. Despite the popularity of it in recent years 
when used in tandem with dark psychology and attempts to control people, 
it was initially designed to be something that could be used regularly to 
ensure that people were taken care of and healthy. It was meant to give 
power back to the people, looking at what makes psychologists so qualified 
to help other people when regular people are not. Effectively, NLP 
techniques are ways to grant the powers of a psychologist to normal people 
with little training. These techniques can then be used in ways that will 
benefit everyone involved—you will be able to actively help other people 
with ease. You will be able to alleviate doubt, create anchors to instill 


confidence, and more, all because you have these skills. 


Of course, there is still the possibility of using this mind control for more 
nefarious reasons. Just as simply as you could use these techniques in order 
to help other people, you can use them specifically to hurt others as well. 
Instead of alleviating anxiety or traumatic memories, you can make 
associations with fear and avoidance in order to push someone further under 


your thumb. 


Effectively, when you learn how to use NLP, you hold the mind of someone 
else, their entire being, in the palm of your hand, and you will be able to 


manipulate it at will. 


NLP and Mirroring 


Ultimately, before you can do anything with NLP, you must become a well- 
liked individual. You must be able to develop what is known as rapport with 
the person that you are attempting to influence, as without that rapport, you 


have no entrance into the other person’s unconscious. 


Your rapport with someone is effectively an accurate measure of just how 
likely you are to be persuasive with that individual. If you want to be able 
to impact the other person’s mind, you need to be able to access it, and the 


best way to access it is to lower the other person’s guard. 


Before understanding how to create that rapport, however, consider that the 
unconscious mind is always watching. Even if your conscious mind cannot 
possibly process everything that you are being exposed to, your 
unconscious mind is still able to pick up on things. It recognizes even 
subliminal signals, such as those included in advertisement that completely 
subvert conscious understanding—and that subversion is what makes this 
process so powerful. When you can subvert someone else’s mind, you can 


take control of it. 


Mirroring is just one way of creating that rapport and gaining access. When 
you mirror someone, you are telling them something specific—that they 
matter to you and that you feel some sort of connection to them. Mirroring 
is what people naturally do as they grow to know those around them better. 
Look at two best friends for a few minutes and you will see it—they will 
both walk the same, talk the same, take drinks nearly in tandem with each 
other, and more. They do this all for a simple reason: Their unconscious 


minds have developed that rapport with each other. They are directly 


communicating with the unconscious mind of the other person, saying that 
they do like and appreciate that other person, and that the other person has 


their utmost trust. 


While developing a natural relationship will always be the best way to 
create rapport, you do not always have time for that. In those instances, you 
can create rapport with three simple steps: Create a connection, match the 


other person, and then identify their punctuator. 


Creating that initial connection is not particularly difficult—you will want 


to make good, convincing eye contact, spend the time to listen to the other 
person, and will the connection into existence. You effectively want to give 
the other person your utmost, undivided attention in hopes of them realizing 
that you do enjoy what they are talking about. During this stage, try giving 
the occasional triple nod. This is when you nod three times in a row, usually 
pensively, to communicate three things to the other person’s unconscious 
mind. You will tell them that you are attentive, understanding, and agreeing 


with the other person. 


With that initial connection created, you will then make it a point to copy 
the other person. In particular, you may find that the best way to do this is 
through copying their vocal cues. While body language is always an easy 
target to mimic, you also risk raising red flags simply because you are 
mimicking them, and people generally do not appreciate when someone 


else is copying them. Instead, concentrate on their verbal cues. 


When you do this, you will usually start by matching the speaking speed 
and intensity of the other person. If they want to speak to you animatedly, 
return that right back to them. If they are speaking to you calmly and 
quietly, you should do the same. In doing so, you are letting them know that 
you are on the same page as them, even if the behaviors do not necessarily 


line up quite right. Nevertheless, it is important. 


With the verbal cues mimicked, try figuring out what the other person’s 
punctuator is. The punctuator is something that all people do in emphasis 
when they are talking. Some people may have a saying that they use 
immediately after making the point that they want to emphasize while other 
people may intentionally raise their eyebrows or make a movement of the 
hand. What is true either way is that the punctuator is something that the 


other person will have, and if you can identify it, you can use it. 


Once it is identified, you should make it a point to actively use it. The next 
time that you think the other person is likely to use the punctuator, mimic it. 
In mimicking it, you will tell the other person’s unconscious mind that you 


are someone that can be related to, and thus, you open up their mind. 


Of course, you will want to test that connection before moving forward— 
you want to ensure that the connection made is valid before you go 
attempting to use NLP in other ways. All you need to do is move a certain 
way to determine if the other person will move like you do. If they do, you 
were successful. If not, then you have likely run into some sort of snag and 


they are not going to be as likely to follow along. 


NLP to Create Anchors 


After creating that rapport, one of the simplest NLP techniques that you can 
use when interacting with someone else is to create anchors. Anchors are 
effectively a form of conditioning that can be wielded in order to control the 
behaviors of someone else. Think about how Pavlov’s dogs were taught to 
respond to the bell with salivating even if food is not around—that is 
exactly what you are doing when you anchor someone, except you are most 


likely using a technique that is far less humiliating. 


When you want to start out, you must have a rapport built with the other 
party. With that rapport built, you will want to ensure that you can actively 
interact with the other person regularly. Since you will effectively be 
conditioning the other person, you need to be able to do it with the freedom 


to trigger and expose the other person. 


Anchoring effectively requires you to follow a few simple steps: You will 
need to figure out what the anchoring feeling that you want to use is. Then 
you must identify a way for you to trigger that feeling. From there, you 
must choose your anchor. With the anchor determined, you will need to 
trigger the feeling with the chosen trigger, and then simultaneously use the 
anchor at the same time. Over time of having the feeling and anchor 
coincide together on a regular basis, the other person will, eventually, 
become anchored—that is to say, the anchor will trigger the feeling that you 


wanted to pair with it. 


ED E> ED ED ED 


This process is actually far simpler than it sounds. For example, imagine 
that you want to anchor your friend that has anxiety. He is always stressing 
out about finals when he has them coming up, and as a college student, 
those finals come up regularly. This means that he has no choice but to face 


that fear regularly. 


You decide that you would rather figure out how to alleviate that anxiety 
with something relatively simple. You decide that you want to teach him to 
feel relaxed when he is exposed to the scratching sound of a pencil. After 


all, during a final, he is likely to hear the constant scratching of pencils on 


paper. 


Now, you have chosen a feeling and an anchor. What you missed, however, 
was the trigger for that feeling. Perhaps you remember that your friend is 
always super relaxed when he is listening to music. Something about it 
soothes his soul, he always says. You then play the music as you are sitting 
next to him and begin scratching away at some paper. You may actually be 
writing, doodling, or literally just scribbling in circles, but the end result is 
him beginning to relax as he listens to the music. 

You repeat this process over time, making sure that it happens regularly as 
you want to ensure that you really install that conditioning well. After a few 
weeks, you find that just scribbling on your paper does, in fact, help him 


calm down, which then enables you to trigger that calmness at will. 


He never realizes what you did, but right around the next final, he tells you 
that he is feeling strangely confident as he goes in—that he feels like he is 
well prepared because as he had studied and took notes, he found himself 


incredibly calm instead of freaking out like he normally is. 


NLP and Pace and Lead 


Similar to being able to anchor someone, another technique you can use 
after being able to mirror and set up that valuable rapport with someone else 
is the ability to pace and lead. When you can pace and lead, you are 
effectively able to control the emotional state of someone else with two 
simple steps: You first match what they are doing, and then you change the 


tempo or intensity of it. 


Remember, mirroring is usually a mutual occurrence—when you are 
mirroring someone else, they are far more likely to mirror you as well, and 
you need to remember to use that concept to your own advantage. When 
you are mirroring someone else, then, and you can see them mirroring you, 
you can begin to tap into their body language with your own. This means 
that you can gently and quietly guide them into doing something else 


without them ever actively thinking about it. 


For example, imagine that you are talking to that same nervous friend. This 
time, he is terrified because he wants to ask someone else on a date, but he 
is too afraid to do it. He is nervously tapping his fingers against the table 
and shifting back and forth, clear signs of his current anxiety. Instead of 
leaving him to it without attempting to help, however, you stop and begin to 
tap your finger on your hand subtly as you listen. You do not make it a point 
to make it obvious, but you allow it to happen at the same pace as your 
friend’s. After a bit, you slowly begin to slow down the speed that you are 
tapping, and you shift your own body language to being relaxed and open. 
You may slow down your own breathing in an attempt to impact his own 


breathing rate. 


After a while, you notice that his tapping is slowing down with yours. This 
means that your technique is working, and eventually, when you stop 


tapping your own fingers, you will see that he does, too. 


Chapter 9: Hypnosis 


Finally, we have reached hypnosis—of the techniques for mind control that 
you are learning, this will be the last. As you work toward the ability to 
hypnotize people, keep in mind everything else that you have learned thus 
far. The minds of other people are absolutely sacred and should be treated 
as such. If you are going to be influencing other people, you should always 
make sure to do it ethically. Remember, just because hypnotizing someone 
for your own selfish gain is dangerous and not recommended does not mean 
that hypnosis itself is bad. In fact, hypnosis has gained massive traction 
lately. You see it used during labor, with women self-hypnotizing 
themselves in order to avoid the pain of labor, focusing through the 
contractions as a way to manage their own comfort. You see people using 
hypnosis for cessation of cigarettes or other unhealthy habits. You even see 


people using it to help them become more self-confident. 


Ultimately, hypnosis has no shortage of usage or of people willing to try it. 
If you remember to keep your control of other people ethical and 
consensual, there is no harm in using these methods. However, you must 


always emphasize consent above all. 


Nevertheless, it is time to delve into the mysterious world of hypnosis. 
Within this chapter, you will learn about how hypnosis works, 
understanding that it is not the utmost control over other people that is 
typically depicted in cartoons or movies—instead, it is a state of extreme 
relaxation and suggestibility. We will go over a few positive uses of 
hypnosis, such as in labor and delivery, and finally, we will look over the 


steps on how to hypnotize someone else that is willing to be your subject. If 


all goes well, you will find that influencing other people is far easier than 


you may have thought. 


How Hypnosis Works 


Primarily, hypnosis works because it is cooperative—usually, one person is 
willingly being relaxed into a hypnotic state, and the hypnotist then 
encourages the thoughts and behaviors that are desired. In a therapeutic 
situation, this may look like encouraging the individual to no longer care 
about an ex that left or being able to resist those cravings of sugar and to 
exercise more. Effectively, it allows for the implantation of thoughts in a 


consensual way. 


This means that the hypnotist is just the coach—they are there to guide the 
way through the subconscious to create the results that the individual that is 
being hypnotized wanted in the first place. The hypnotist effectively is able 
to manage to walk the individual through the steps of hypnosis, and in 
doing so, guides the individual to that state of extreme calmness. 

Within the hypnotic state, it is often reported that the one being hypnotized 
is convinced that they are asleep. They are so deeply relaxed that they feel 
like they are entirely unaware of the world around them. However, that 
could not be further from the truth—when you are in a hypnotic state, you 
are actually incredibly aware and focused—but only on what the hypnotist 
is saying. If the hypnotist is guiding you through breathing practices to keep 
you calm, all you will focus on is what the hypnotist is saying. If the 
hypnotist happens to be using any sort of prop or focal object, you will 
focus on that. In being so incredibly focused on one particular moment or 


instance, you will find that you are able to be readily and easily influenced. 


This primarily works because of the divide between the conscious and 
unconscious minds. While the two minds work together, the conscious mind 
acts like a sort of filter between what the unconscious mind is being 
exposed to and the mind itself. This means that the conscious is basically 
the guard dog of the mind, and if it interferes, you are not going to be able 
to get through to the more susceptible, impressionable unconscious, which 


is where suggestions are meant to go. 


When you encourage the conscious mind to focus entirely on one object or 
action, whether breathing or the swinging of a pendulum, or anything else, 
you distract the conscious. Think of what happens if you throw a dog a 
piece of steak: They run after the steak and happily munch on that while 
you are free to move forward. Effectively, with hypnosis, you throw your 
conscious mind a steak by having it so incredibly focused on what is going 


on. 


As this happens, the hypnotist then makes several suggestions. They will 


talk to the one being hypnotized, making sure that the unconscious mind is 


able to absorb and internalize all of those thoughts nicely in order to ensure 
that they do, in fact, become utilized and acted upon. Because the 
unconscious mind is going to be the one driving actions without the 
conscious paying attention, those behaviors become quite easy. They simply 


happen because the unconscious mind does it. 


Remember how in NLP, you are actively recognizing that the unconscious 
mind is the one that controls everything? That is effectively what you are 
seeing here. Hypnosis, like NLP, will make sure that the unconscious mind 
is acting accordingly to ensure that the one being hypnotized is able to do 


what was desired. 


Why Use Hypnosis? 

Now, with that in mind, you may be wondering why people are so willing 
and ready to use hypnosis on themselves to the point that they would even 
pay other people to help them with the process in the first place. The answer 
is that hypnosis is incredibly powerful because the unconscious is 
incredibly powerful. It should be used precisely because it does allow 
people to tap into their unconscious minds to unlock all of the potential that 


they needed to utilize. 


When you use hypnosis, you effectively are making sure that you can draw 
all of the benefits that your mind has to offer. It offers you benefits such as 
helping cope with any phobias or anxiety triggers that you may have. If 
your anxiety and phobia is rooted in your unconscious, what better way to 
treat it than to directly impact it? It can help with pain management without 
requiring medication, making it incredibly valuable for people that will 
need pain medication but may find that they are at an increased risk for 
addiction or abusing that medication if they have it. It can be used to fight 
stress as well, working as a sort of grounding method for the individual 


using it if they want to reach a state of relaxation. 


It can also be used in more insidious ways—some people use hypnosis to 
control other people. It is commonly used in brainwashing in cults, for 
example, relying on the constant repetition of words or other methods that 


are designed to tap into the unconscious mind in some way, shape, or form. 


This means that hypnosis can be dangerous for those who are particularly 


susceptible to its effects. Not everyone is, but the vast majority of people 


are quite susceptible, and this means that these people could be subtly and 
unknowingly controlled by strangers without ever realizing that it was 


happening in the first place. 


Using Hypnosis 

Ultimately, hypnosis happens in several different ways—some people 
utilize an utter bombardment of the senses in order to trigger that 
unconscious state, while others will lull people into it with gentle 
storytelling or guided meditations. Nevertheless, regardless of the method, 
the end result is the same: The other person ends up being controlled 
without being aware of it. We will stop and look at two simple methods of 
hypnosis that can be used to trigger trances, which can then be utilized to 


ensure that the one being hypnotized is entirely obedient. 


Bombardment 

Think of a time when you had a teacher or someone else that was 
extraordinarily boring when they spoke. It didn’t matter what was being 
discussed—their voice was simply so boring; you could not help but space 
out when they talked. Though unintentional, that is exactly what this sort of 


hypnosis accomplishes. 


When you use bombardment, you are effectively creating a constant and 
steady stimulation that drones on to lull the other person into a trance. It 
could involve someone speaking rapidly in a flat voice or using someone’s 
naturally unvaried voice in order to eventually bore the person into a trance. 
The brain struggles with processing the information when it is all constant 


and unending, which is exactly why it becomes so difficult to understand. 


If you want to use this, then, you will want to start up a single topic and 
stick to it for the next several minutes, making your voice as flat as 
possible. You want to talk as much as possible during that time, not 
relenting at all, even when you see that the other person is beginning to lose 
focus. As the focus is lost, you can begin to talk directly to the unconscious 


mind, making suggestions and encouraging certain behaviors. 


Nonverbal Hypnosis 

Another method is quite similar but is done in complete silence. However, 
this one will require you to have rapport built with the individual that you 
are attempting to hypnotize, as you are going to need to tap into their 
tendency to mirror you if you want to be effective. When you use this 
method, you are going to make sure that they are following along with your 
own body language, and you will start to do something repetitive and 


rhythmic that is still subtle, expecting the other person to follow suit. 


When you use this, you are effectively having the same relaxing effect that 
you have on an infant that calms down when swayed. Just as the newborn 
calms down to the motion, so too do adults, even though they may not even 


realize that they are still susceptible to actions like that. 


Start by ensuring that you do have rapport with the other person. With that 
established, you want to actively mirror the other person for a while until 
you know that they are mirroring you back. From there, you will begin to 
use several motions back and forth in an attempt to sway the other person 
into a relaxed state. However, the key here is making sure that whatever you 
do, you are making it subtle and easily followed without it seeming to stand 


out at all when done around other people. 


Perhaps you start by tilting your head back and forth ever so slightly. It does 
not have to be particularly obvious—just gently and subtly move your head 
in a rhythmic manner. Chances are, so long as you are subtle enough, the 
other person will never notice that you are doing it—but they will pick up 
on it themselves. As you do this, begin to use more of your body as well, 
but make sure it is still just as subtle. Perhaps you slowly raise and lower 
your shoulders ever so slightly along with the slight roll of your head. Then, 
perhaps you also make it a point to rock back and forth on your heels as 
well. You may also alter your breathing as well in an attempt to ensure that 


the other person is breathing deeply and calmly. 


With some time and effort, you will find that the other person is following 
all of your cues, especially if you are a trusted party in the first place. As 
they begin to relax, you will find that they are far more susceptible to what 
you are saying, and you are more likely to be able to get them to internalize 
information in this state than before. Make sure that you tell them 
everything that you wanted their unconscious mind to know before you stop 
the hypnotic motions, otherwise you risk them coming out of the trance too 


early, mitigating everything that you are doing. 


Chapter 10: The Benefits of 
Dark Psychology 


At last, we arrive at the end of the book, and as we arrive here, it seems 
fitting to stop with a brief address of reasons that you could use dark 
psychology in ways that are not nearly as insidious as many that were 
discussed within the book. Remember, while dark psychology may be based 
upon looking at how the dark personality types prey on people, that is not 
all that it is good for—it is incredibly important to understand these abilities 
and skills. In understanding comes the ability to protect and prevent, after 
all. 


Nevertheless, as you have been exposed to several malicious usages from 
several of these techniques, let’s go over the ethics of dark psychology, as 
well as the benefits that may arise from it. Dark psychology does not have 
to be the harmful concept that it has become because of the people that 


wielded it—you can reclaim it. 


Is Dark Psychology Evil? 


For the million-dollar question: Is dark psychology evil? The short answer 
is, no. It is actually neutral. It does not have the capability of being good or 
evil in the same sense that gravity cannot be good or evil—it simply is. As a 
force without free will, without any way to control itself, it cannot possibly 
be labeled with a human construct such as good or evil. However, that does 
not mean that it is necessarily safe, nor does it mean that it cannot be used 


in hurtful manners. 


While dark psychology itself is not evil, it can be used by evil people. Just 
as it is not about the gun being evil, but rather the one wielding the gun that 
determines how evil the situation is, dark psychology is entirely at the 
mercy of those wielding it. If the individual who uses these techniques uses 
it for evil purposes, taking advantage of these techniques to steal and abuse, 
that is his own failure, and no one else’s. That failure is something that he 


will have to address for himself and no one else, and that is significant. 


Of course, that means that the inverse is true as well—it cannot truly be a 
good force either. While dark psychology may not truly be good, it can be 
used in ways that are beneficial to people, and throughout the book, you 
were exposed to several. Is it really bad to influence someone to buy a car 
that will truly better serve their own family? Is it bad to influence someone 
to no longer have crippling anxiety at the idea of taking a final exam? What 
about in hypnotizing someone to no longer have insomnia? You would be 
hard-pressed to find anyone who would claim that any of those were bad 


decisions or wrong, even though they all used techniques common to dark 


psychology. 


Remember, as dark psychology has been studied, people have gained access 
into the minds of predators that are capable of far more than the average 
person is. The average person is not going to be intentionally manipulating 
and harassing people on the regular—he is going to be minding his own 
business. He does not have any interest in preying on other people. So, 
would that average person have a use for dark psychology? Quite possibly! 
It can be used in ways that were discussed throughout this book, and those 
can be beneficial to literally anyone that interacts with other people. Several 
other techniques can be used on yourself as well. You can anchor yourself 
to create your own coping mechanisms, for example, or you can choose to 
self-hypnotize in order to help yourself build self-confidence. These are not 


evil. 


Ultimately, whether the art is good or evil, one thing remains true—it is all 


about how it is used that determines how welcome the use of it is. 


Reasons to Use Dark Psychology 


There are several reasons that one may intentionally learn dark psychology. 
They may want to use these methods to help themselves—perhaps they 
were a victim of a dark personality type in the past and they want to 
understand why. That insight is invaluable, and gaining the reasons why and 
how someone was able to entirely and utterly dismantle someone’s 
personality can be therapeutic in some way. In understanding how you have 
become vulnerable, you can remove those vulnerabilities to figure out how 
best to fight them off. 


Some people may learn about dark psychology out of sheer curiosity—we 
are fascinated by what scares us. After all, horror is a massive genre in 
movies for a reason! You may find that learning how the insides of an evil 
individual’s mind works is just as fascinating as it is terrifying, and for that 


reason alone, you want to keep reading on how they do what they do. 


Other people may read simply because they want to be able to fight back. 
When you can recognize dark psychology, you can prevent it from being 
effective. So much of dark psychology is all about being able to identify 
vulnerabilities and exploit them, and if you know those vulnerabilities and 
about the common exploits, you can simply side-step them. You can avoid 
falling for them and instead work on strengthening your own skills to 


protect yourself. 


Effectively, dark psychology is incredibly flexible, as are the techniques. 
The very same techniques that can utterly destroy someone else can also be 


used in ways that actually better everyone involved. They can build self- 


confidence and self-esteem. They can help cope with anxiety and other 
mental health issues. They can make you more likely to be successful in 
interacting with other people simply because you will have a better 


understanding. 


Above all, you will be able to protect yourself with ease. You will be able to 
have peace of mind, thanks to learning about dark psychology. At the very 
least, you will be able to rest easy knowing that the dark personality types 
will be far less likely to pull a fast one over you simply because you know 


what to expect. 


The Insight of Dark Psychology 


Now, as this book finally comes to an end, try to think about the ways that 
dark psychology and the secrets that it holds may have provided you with 
insight. What have you learned about the world that you did not know 
before? What do you know about the mind and how it works? What secrets 


have you learned that are invaluable? 


Dark psychology is quite unique in the sense that it opens the window for 
us to see through the eyes of the narcissist, the Machiavellian, or the 
psychopath. In understanding how these techniques work, you can see 
exactly what spurs these people to act in the ways that they do. You can 
figure out why people want to behave these ways and what they stand to 
gain by doing so. 


While you may never want to manipulate others yourself, you may find that 
the insight of understanding why is critical, especially if you are in the 
position of healing from a relationship with one such person. When you are 
able to understand the other person’s mind, you may be able to recognize it 
for what it truly is—disordered. 


Beyond just that, though, the insight provided in understanding dark 
psychology allows us to see what made us so vulnerable to its grasp in the 
first place. You will be able to see exactly why these problems arise. You 
will know what it is that each of these techniques plays off of, and in 


knowing what they use, you can figure out how to shield from them. 


Consider that NLP directly influences the unconscious mind. When you 
know that the unconscious mind is one of the most commonly attacked 
parts of the mind when trying to influence someone else, you can remind 
yourself to always do self-checks, understanding why you do what you are 
doing at any time. You can ask yourself if the behaviors that you are doing 
at that moment are your own, or if they are common for people that are 
usually manipulated. You can figure out if the thought in your mind that is 
driving you is your own, or if it seems out of place, or contradictory to a 


though that you know that you have had for ages. 


Effectively, when you are able to recognize the thought processes of 
yourself in relation to dark psychology, you can figure out whether you 
have been manipulated in the past. Knowing that is critical to recognizing if 
you are actually a victim or if you are proactive enough to avoid 


victimization altogether. 


What is true, despite the insight that you have gained, however, is that, you 
have earned knowledge. You have knowledge of what is possible in the 
world. You have knowledge about the mind and some of its secrets. You 
have knowledge about the predators that you may never have been aware of 
in reality. That is invaluable. Knowledge is power, and if you can wield that 


power bravely and proudly, you will be able to protect yourself. 


Conclusion 


Congratulations! That brings us to the end of Dark Psychology Secrets. 
Hopefully, as you read, you found the content to be compelling, interesting, 
informative, and easy to follow. With care, this book was designed to guide 


you through the world of dark psychology. 


Dark psychology is the look into the minds of the most heinous, monstrous 
humans that exist. When you are looking into the depths of dark 
psychology, you are looking into the minds of those who are out to hurt 
others. Serial killers, master manipulators, and abusers alike may share 
these traits, and those traits make them particularly dangerous. What is 
worse, however, is that these people understand psychology. They 
understand exactly how they need to interact with other people in order to 
be seen as charismatic and trustworthy enough to win a spot in the hearts of 
their victims and targets. The dark psychology user is able to do this simply 


by knowing how to manipulate their target in just the right way. 


However, they can only hurt and manipulate you if you give them that 
power. Remember, having the power to recognize and reject the abuse from 
the dark psychology user will be your best shield and sword from them. Not 
only will it help you guard against them and their attempts, you will also be 


able to access their minds right back. 


As you read through this book, perhaps the most important takeaway from 
it all is to remember that dark psychology itself is neutral—it is neither 
good nor bad. While the original wielders may have been malevolent, that 


does not make their weapons inherently bad as well. Remember that being 


able to understand dark psychology grants you a special access to the mind 
of someone else and you should always be mindful of how you use that 


access. It should not be abused in any manner. 


Finally, as you finish up, remember to always keep your own use of dark 
psychology ethical. Always ask yourself if you really need to tap into the 
mind of someone else. Ask yourself if the other person is the primary 
beneficiary if you do happen to tap into their mind. Ask yourself if they will 
be happy to have the end results of you tapping into their mind. If you can 
answer that they will be benefitted significantly and they will appreciate it, 


then it may be an acceptable time to use your arts. 


Nevertheless, as this book draws to a close, you may be wondering what 
comes next. Ultimately, that depends upon you. You have learned some of 
the basics of dark psychology. Do you want to learn more about the natural 
users? Do you want to learn how to fight it? Do you want to learn how to 
become a better user? What is your end goal? 

No matter what that goal is, you may find that there are several options for 
you to pursue from here. You could make it a point to learn how to become 
emotionally intelligent. This goes hand-in-hand with being able to persuade 
others with ease. You may decide to look into the process of cognitive 
behavioral therapy—doing so may provide you with more resources to 
protect yourself and heal from any manipulation that you may have 
identified in your life. You may decide that what is right for you is to look 
into the narcissist himself, learning how he abuses in order to better 
understand him. You may even choose to delve into psychology in general 
—there are several different topics that you may find to be interesting and 


useful in your journey from here on out. 


No matter what you choose, however, keep in mind that it is up to you.l No 
matter what anyone else tries to convince you, you deserve free will. You 
deserve to be able to protect that free will. You deserve to have that free 
will honored. As you go through the next chapter in your joumey, good 
luck. Hopefully, you have found what you needed within this book, and you 


will find what you need in the future as well. 


Thank you for allowing me to join you on your journey through dark 
psychology, and good luck as you continue. Finally, if you have found that 
this book has been compelling, useful, or even just generally informative, 
please feel free to leave a review on Amazon. Your feedback, whether good 


or bad, is always welcome to ensure that these books are always improving. 


Emotional Intelligence & Cognitive 
Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 


Secrets and Techniques to Improve Mental, 
Cognitive, Emotional, and Relational 
Abilities. Overcome Depression, Anxiety, 
Phobia and Negative Thought 


Introduction 


Congratulations on purchasing Emotional Intelligence & Cognitive 


Behavioral Therapy and thank you for doing so. 


If you have ever felt like no matter how hard you have tried in life there 
always seems to be something going wrong, you are not alone. Whether 
you find that you are a negative person, that you suffer from anxiety, 
depression, or a wide range of other problematic moods, or you simply feel 
like your thinking is not as efficient as it could be, you may be feeling like 
what you need above all is to find some way to protect yourself or how to 


correct how you approach the situation. 


Many people believe that if they do suffer from anxiety or depression, the 
only treatment option for them is medication. While medication itself is not 
something to look down upon, there are also several situations during which 
you could choose to treat the issue behaviorally instead. Instead of 
assuming you have no option but to use medication, you may consider 


attempting to work on yourself instead. 


Of course, you should make this decision in tandem with your primary care 
provider, especially if you would have to discontinue the use of a 
medication in order to begin focusing solely on the behavioral aspect. You 
should always continue the use of your medication as directed and only 


wean off as directed and with a doctor’s approval. 


Ultimately, there are several ways that you can begin to treat yourself for 


issues like anxiety, depression, anger issues, and insomnia through attempts 


to change your behavior instead of attempts to change biology. Some 
people prefer traditional psychotherapy, in which they sit and talk to a 
therapist for an extended period of time to get to the bottom of whatever 
issue they are having. Other people like to use eye movement 
desensitization and reprocessing in order to help, especially if they find that 


they are suffering from forms of anxiety related to unprocessed trauma. 


This book, in particular, will address two specific forms of self-help: 
Emotional intelligence and cognitive behavioral therapy. With the skills and 
knowledge within each of these processes, you will begin to develop the 
skills to tackle nearly any issues related to emotions. All you need is time, 
effort, patience, compassion for yourself, and a guide--such as this book--to 


give you all of the critical information you will need. 


As you read this book, you will be given a guide to both the topics of 
emotional intelligence and to cognitive behavioral therapy. Emotional 
intelligence will help you build up the skills and awareness you will need to 
be effective in a social setting, which can help mitigate anxiety and 
depression symptoms. Cognitive-behavioral therapy can help you begin to 
restructure your thoughts from the ground up—literally. You will be able to 
change your unconscious thoughts in order to impact how you think and 
feel about situations. In particular, you will look at techniques that will 
guide you through tackling the symptoms of anxiety, depression, insomnia, 
and uncontrolled anger. Finally, you will be given a list of several social 
skills that you will find can actually help your chances of achieving your 


goals. 


Before you begin this book, remember, if you ever feel like you are a 
danger to yourself or others, you should always reach out for help. If you 
feel like you have urges to hurt yourself or to intentionally inflict harm 
upon others, you should consider this as a legitimate medical emergency. 
You do not have to feel that way, and recognizing that those feelings are 


wrong is only the beginning of protecting yourself. 


There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for 
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much 


useful information as possible; please enjoy! 


Chapter 1: Emotional Intelligence 


Can you think of a person that you interact with regularly that does not 
seem to understand normal social conventions? No matter how often you 
interact, you may find that he is still just as clueless about basic standards 
and how to interact with others, and it becomes somewhat of a drain. 
Imagine your friend, Eric. He is someone who struggles to actually speak 
his mind with other people. He frequently volunteers for far more than he 
can actually comfortably accomplish. He tries his best to actively meet his 
obligations, but to no avail—he simply overcommits and it always comes 


back to haunt him. 


Of course, he then gets incredibly frustrated and tends to lash out at other 
people in response, despite the fact that it was his fault. He always finds a 
way to blame other people for his own shortcomings, and they are never his 
own fault. Even if he had dropped a plate out of sheer clumsiness, he is 
likely to blame it on the floor or on his shoes, or even the way that the sun 


was glaring in his eyes. 


This is the picture of someone lacking self-awareness: A basic component 


of emotional intelligence. 


Emotional intelligence is a skill set that is critical to success, particularly in 
any setting that requires group interactions. In fact, employers will 
frequently choose to go for the less-qualified, but still more-emotionally 


intelligent individual over the smarter, but less emotionally intelligent 


individual when hiring, specifically because of all of the benefits that 


emotional intelligence brings with it. 


When you are emotionally intelligent, you are generally far more pleasant 
to be around, and that is something that even the best-built resume cannot 
guarantee. You may have gotten a degree at Harvard, top of your class, but 
if you are not emotionally intelligent, you are going to be excruciatingly 
difficult to work with in any capacity. Think about Eric for a moment—he 
was incredibly draining to interact with simply because of the fact that he 


could not hold himself accountable. 


What is Emotional Intelligence? 


You may be wondering, then: What is emotional intelligence? You can 
understand that it is an important skillset, but why? The answer is relatively 
simple. Emotional intelligence is commonly defined as the ability to be 
aware of and control one’s own emotions while also maintaining the ability 


to manage relationships with others in a way that is fair and empathetic. 


Now, that is a bit of a mouthful. However, it can be broken down into three 
distinct points: 


e It involves the ability to understand one’s own emotions 


e It involves being able to avoid falling for gut reactions and 


emotional impulses with self-regulation. 


e It involves being able to manage relationships with others in ways 


that are fair, empathetic, and beneficial 


Effectively, it is your ability to make sure that you are not reacting to the 
world like an angry preschooler. Think about how a preschooler is prone to 


react to almost any situation: If you take away something that a preschooler 
was playing with, the child may yell and scream in frustration, or try to hurt 
you in response. This is primarily because the preschooler is not able to 
self-regulate. He is impulsive because the parts of his brain that are needed 


to manage them are not yet developed. 


When you are highly emotionally intelligent, you are able to remain in 
control instead. You are more likely to react in ways that are intelligent and 
Strategic rather than giving in to whatever your most recent emotional 
impulse was. If someone does something that angers you, you are not going 
to decide to run them over with your car or get back at them, simply 
because you know that, while anger has a specific purpose and place, it is 
not what you should use when managing your relationships with others. 
Anger is motivating, but rarely is the destruction that anger can encourage 


worthwhile. 


People naturally flock to those with emotional intelligence for one specific 
reason—they are far easier to deal with than those who are not. If you can 
make sure that you do not give in to your impulses, you are making 
intelligent, informed decisions on how to react. Instead of screaming that 
your order was delayed and will be late, you shrug it off, apologize to the 
intended recipient and file away in the back of your mind that you will be 
making it a point to order earlier next time to avoid the same problem from 
happening again in the future. You learn from the past and move on without 
letting it get you down because that is the most well-adjusted manner to go 


about your life and motivators. 


In general, emotional intelligence can change from person to person, and 
people usually have differing amounts of emotional intelligence that has 
developed naturally. Some people are simply more inclined to be 
empathetic and self-disciplined, and because of this, the picture of 
emotional intelligence is always different. It can present itself differently in 
one person over another, but what is important to remember is that it is a 
skill. Anyone can learn to be emotionally intelligent if they know and learn 
how to approach the situation, and in learning to be emotionally intelligent, 
you will find that you are far happier within your relationships. You will 
find that other people are kinder to you when you are able to regulate your 
own emotions and expectations, and you will find that you are more likely 
to be favored over someone who does not have emotional intelligence. That 
benefit alone makes learning the process and skillsets that much more 


critical. 


The History of Emotional Intelligence 


Despite the fact that the concept of emotional intelligence itself is a 
relatively new concept, it has always existed in some capacity. You can see 
it across species, with those that are highly empathetic being among the 
most effective leaders. In fact, oftentimes, in primates, the leaders show just 


as much, if not more, empathy than the females of their species. 


When you think about what it means to lead, this makes sense: When you 
are empathetic, you are able to understand the feelings of others: You can 
tell how the emotions of other people are impacting them and those around 
them. You can tell what people need because you understand their feelings. 
When you can understand their feelings, you are able to help them better: 
You feel motivated to help people more than before simply because you 


know how they feel and you can relate. 


However, in relatively recent years, this understanding of what makes a 
good leader a good leader has become more and more focused upon in 
research. The usage of the term, “emotional intelligence,” occurred for the 
first time in locatable history in 1964, coined by a psychology professor 
named Michael Beldoch. He may have named the topic, but it did not 


become mainstream until 1995. 


In 1995, with the book Emotional Intelligence, Daniel Goleman managed to 
push the concept of emotional intelligence into the limelight with his claims 
that it was crucial if people wanted to be successful in life. According to 
Goleman, upwards of 66% of what creates a successful individual can be 
directly related and attributed to emotional intelligence. When you think 


about it practically, this makes sense: Emotional intelligence determines 


how people are able to interact with others. It is how people are able to get 
along and solve conflicts, as well as how to build relationships. In this life, 
it is next to impossible to live without any interaction from other people, 


and this is exactly why emotional intelligence got so much support. 


However, despite the fact that Goleman was responsible for pushing it into 
popularity. There was research happening long before him. In particular, the 
psychologists Peter Salovey and John Mayer began to study emotional 
intelligence well before Goleman. They used the term with the definition 
that you learned above with slightly more specific language: IN particular, 
they defined emotional intelligence as the ability to recognize and 
understand the emotions of both oneself and those of others, while also 
being able to discriminate to decide upon which feelings should be used and 
which should be avoided, while actively using that ability to discriminate 


against emotions in interactions with others. 


Effectively, they were the ones who came up with a solid definition that 
made emotional intelligence what it is today. Salovey and Mayer, in 
particular, studied how to understand the concept of emotional intelligence 
as a whole, seeking to find out if it is necessary. Eventually, they came up 
with what is known as the ability model. The ability model states that there 
are four distinct skills that are necessary to understand emotional 


intelligence and to behave emotionally intelligently. These skills are: 


e The ability to perceive emotions, such as through nonverbal body 


language and expressions 


e The ability to reason with emotions, using them in order to 
promote thinking 


e The ability to understand emotions, learning to interpret 


emotions, even in difficult situations 


e The ability to manage emotions, such as being able to respond in 
the most appropriate manner, even when it is not the way you 


would like to behave. 


Not too long after Salovey and Mayer came up with their definitions, the 
rise of Goleman’s model quickly rose to popularity, referred to commonly 
as the Mixed Model of emotional intelligence. In particular, Goleman 
identified five components that are responsible for emotional intelligence. 
These five components come together to create the ability to behave in 


ways that are emotionally intelligent, and they are: 


e The ability to use self-awareness 

e The ability to use self-regulation 

e The ability to keep yourself motivated 
e The ability to be empathetic 

e The ability to use social skills 


Finally, in more recent history, a psychologist by the name of Konstantinos 
V. Petrides has been dabbling in his own interpretations of emotional 
intelligence. In fact, he came up with what was known as the Trait Model. 
Within the trait model, it is assumed that the perceptions of a person’s own 
abilities determine how people approach a situation. Effectively, if you 
think that you are patient, you will respond patiently far more often than 


someone who thinks of themselves as hotheaded. 


The purpose of this final model is to recognize that people will usually find 
that they are prone to very specific behaviors, and in learning that those 
methods are how they usually respond to situations, they will use that 
thinking to determine future behaviors. This is how people get stuck into 
the same actions over and over again: If you believe that you are an angry 
person, you are more inclined to behave angrily because you already see 
yourself as angry anyway. When you then respond angrily, you prove to 


yourself that you are, in fact, angry in general. 


Chapter 2: The Purpose of Emotional Intelligence 


Imagine that you are ready to go on a date with someone that you have been 
wanting to ask out for months. You finally built up the courage to approach 
the other person and ask for a date, but as you approach, you find that you 
completely stumble over the words. With your cheeks flushing in 
embarrassment, you need to figure out what to do next. You could yell in 
frustration, something that you strongly feel the urge to do. You could leave 
and refuse to speak to the person you wanted to ask out again because you 
are so embarrassed, but doing so is only going to hurt. You could try any 
number of different things, and you need to figure out what to do next, and 


quickly. How do you do it? 


This is a decision that will be made with your emotional intelligence in 
mind. If you are not particularly emotionally intelligent, you are likely to 
reject the idea of actually making any sort of scene that would be 
problematic to your chances of getting a date. You are also not likely to do 
something that would be embarrassing. You are more likely to choose to 
regroup yourself and try again because you are invested in the relationship 
working out. However, how likely are other people going to be to do the 


same? 


Emotional intelligence impacts everything. Because emotions drive nearly 
everything that we do, lurking in your subconscious mind with our minds 
telling us what to do and not to do through impulses, emotional intelligence 
is vital to every decision you make. Are you likely to behave impulsively? 
You likely do not have very good self-control or self-regulation skills, 


which are an important component of emotional intelligence. Are you likely 


to try to be the people pleaser, even though it means that you do not meet 
your own needs? You may be inclined to say that would be incredibly 
emotionally intelligent, as helping other people could be seen as having 
empathy, but this is actually another sign of lacking it: You are too timid to 
strive toward having your own needs met and choose the discomfort of not 
having your own needs met over the discomfort of having to face a 


potentially difficult situation. 


Emotional Intelligence in Real Life 


In real life, emotional intelligence has several practical uses. It actually 
shows up in literally every interaction that you have with other people. 
Even when you are by yourself, emotional intelligence is directly related to 


how you handle any problems that arise or the way that you view yourself. 


Imagine for a moment that you are in a relationship with someone else. You 
are quite emotionally intelligent, but your partner is not. You and your 
partner disagree about something, and while you are willing to disagree and 
move on, your partner seems wholeheartedly offended about the 
disagreement and claims that if you cannot change your own mind and 
figure out how best to assimilate with your partner’s views, then your 
partner does not think that the relationship is viable long-term. This is an 
example of the difference between how someone with low and high 
emotional intelligence would handle that situation—the one with low EQ 
thinks of the situation as entirely worthless. They are driven by their 
emotions, and if their emotions tell them that they cannot be in a 
relationship with someone who disagrees with them, then they refuse to do 
exactly that. They will not be in that relationship simply because they 
would rather serve themselves than the other party. They need absolute 
harmony in order to feel like their relationship is secure. Is that realistic? 
Not really—trelationships are never perfect. There are no two people in the 


world that will ever have a perfect marriage without any conflict at all. 


Emotional intelligence includes several very important skills in order to 
function as well as it is supposed to. In order to be emotionally intelligent, 
you must be able to be self-aware. The partner in the previous example was 


simply not. The partner was unable to recognize that it was emotions 


clouding the situation and that the relationship was not deserving of being 
dropped just because of one small disagreement. When you are self-aware, 
you know when you are behaving in an emotional manner rather than a way 


that should be conducive to success and happiness. 


Beyond that, emotional intelligence encompasses empathy—this means that 
you will be using emotional intelligence every single time that you relate to 
someone else around you. You will be spending that time with other people 
and wholeheartedly expecting that the situation would be fine because you 
can relate and communicate. However, that relationship and communication 


ability comes directly from your ability to be emotionally intelligent. 


Consider all of the social skills that you use on a regular basis outside of 
self-regulation and empathy. Your ability to persuade others is a trait 
common to emotional intelligence. Your ability to recognize the differences 


between people as inherently good is a sign of emotional intelligence. 


Essentially, if you are a good person and people genuinely enjoy being 
around you, you are probably emotionally intelligent. That will come back 
to help you in your relationships, at work, when dealing with conflicts, and 
even just when you are at home and got some disappointing news. In being 
emotionally intelligent, you are more likely to be happier, comfortable, and 


successful in most aspects of life. 


The Practicality of Emotional Intelligence 


This obviously makes emotional intelligence incredibly practical—if it 
determines the success in nearly every aspect of your life, it must be 


practical in some ways, right? 
That is exactly right. 


Emotional intelligence allows you to do several things. You will be able to 
express yourself without worrying about what other people think—consider 
how usually, when met with resistance from other people, it can be difficult 
to express your disagreement. When you are emotionally intelligent, you do 
not worry about it because you trust that you have the tact to handle the 
situation smoothly and effectively. This is a practical use—you do not have 


to worry about uncomfortable conversations. 


You are likely to be more resilient when you are emotionally intelligent as 
well—think of the benefit of that for a moment. This means that you can 
cope with disappointment and problems without immediately freaking out. 
So many people these days cannot handle the stress of something changing 
or plans having to be altered, but if you are emotionally intelligent, beyond 
that initial worry, you will find that change is not so scary after all. In fact, 
you welcome change. If that change came because something you have 
done has failed, you would see it as the perfect opportunity to attempt to 
learn from whatever went wrong the first time. This means that you will 
legitimately be learning from your mistakes instead of feeling like they are 


the biggest disappointment in the world. 


Perhaps the most practical skill of all, however, is not the ability to 
communicate, or the ability to cope with change and failure, but rather, to 
be a good leader. Emotional intelligence creates fantastic leaders that are 
able to weigh everything into consideration in order to figure out how best 
to approach a situation at hand. This means that if you are a good leader, 
you will be able to make good, clear judgments that are in everyone’s best 
interest, even if it is not necessarily the path that you would have chosen 
yourself. This is okay—it means that you are actively thinking ahead about 
your people, and that is what makes you such a good leader. You genuinely 
care about those that work with you, and you want to ensure that everyone 


is taken care of. 


Traits of Emotional Intelligence 


Now, let’s take a look at exactly what it is that makes someone emotionally 
intelligent. What are the traits that can be used to identify whether someone 
is actually emotionally intelligent versus simply good at faking 


relationships? 


People who are highly emotionally intelligent find that they are often quite 
competent when it comes to anything related to emotions. They can 
understand their own emotions, while also recognizing the emotions of 
others. They are able to relate to other people and use their own feelings to 
help them understand, but at the end of the day, they do not give in to their 
feelings. They are ultimately in control, despite the fact that their feelings 


may be incredibly compelling. 


These people are also incredibly motivated and driven—they have an 
intrinsic drive to them that is rare otherwise. They know that they can 
accomplish nearly anything, and they will always seek to better themselves. 
Success is rarely the endpoint for these people, and they will always strive 
for better, but also recognize that perfection is an impossibility. Effectively, 
they are chasing after practical betterment without ever aiming for an 
impossibility the way that some people without emotional intelligence, such 


as the narcissist, may do. 


Finally, one of the best skills of all is actually a series of skills. The 
emotionally intelligent individual is incredibly strong in regards to social 
skills. They are able to regulate themselves with ease around other people, 
and able to communicate like it is second nature to them—because it is. 


While it may have taken time to build that emotional intelligence up, with it 


present, it becomes like second nature to always ensure that they are able to 
communicate and interact with ease. These people are so good at interacting 
with others that they seem to make friends and develop a following no 
matter where they go. Everyone wants to acknowledge them and get to 
know them, and their own charisma seems to attract people that want to 


help with ease. 


Chapter 3: The Pillars of Emotional Intelligence 


As touched upon earlier, emotional intelligence comes in the form of four 
distinct pillars: Self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, and 
relationship management. Each of these pillars contain several other skills 
within them that come together, and when you are able to assemble them all 


in one person, you end up with someone who is emotionally intelligent. 


You can learn to develop each of these skillsets over time, manually 
working with them until you are able to be just as emotionally intelligent as 
those who were born with that flair naturally. Keep in mind, however, that 
as you develop this skill, you consider the fact that it does take time and 
energy. You cannot simply do two or three quick activities and suddenly 
declare that you are emotionally intelligent. Emotional intelligence is the 
culmination of the development of these skills, and that culmination only 
comes if you are able to actively exercise those emotional intelligence 


muscles. 


You can then think of your emotional intelligence as your body: If you do 
not work on it for a while and feed it nothing but junk, it is going to begin 
to fail you. You will become unhealthy. However, that does not mean that 
you have to remain unhealthy. Just as you can exercise your body in order 
to lose weight and build muscle and heart health, you can exercise your 
ability to be emotionally intelligent. Even skills such as empathy can be 
developed with relative simplicity if you are willing to put in the work to do 


SO. 


Now, we will take the time to go over each of the four pillars of emotional 
intelligence, what they entail, and the most common skills that are regularly 
bundled with them. As you read through this chapter, try to think about 
yourself and where you play out in this all. Are you emotionally intelligent? 
If not, what can you do to bring yourself to that level? Can you figure out 
where you are lacking? Try to self-analyze as we go through this process, 
and if it helps, use a notebook in order to write down anything that comes to 


mind. 


Self- 
awaren Social Awareness 
ess 


Pillars of 
Emotional 
Intelligence 
= Relation 
ship 
manage 
ment 


Self-regulation 


Self-Awareness 


Self-awareness encompasses your ability to know what is going on with 
yourself at any given moment. Effectively, it allows you to know your own 
current state with a quick check-in. In particular, you will need to be able to 
identify your own emotional state—knowing exactly how you are feeling at 
any given moment. Remember, you should know the emotion more 
specifically than just saying that you feel good or bad—you should be able 
to tell if good or bad is actually happy, angry, annoyed, disappointed, or 


anything else. 


Beyond just emotional self-awareness, you must also be able to perform 
what is known as an accurate self-assessment—this is the ability to 
understand your own strengths and weaknesses at any given moment and is 
a critical skill to have. When you can accurately self-assess, you are 
declaring that you are well aware of your own shortcomings and aspects of 
your life in which you may need help. Remember, it is okay to need help 


sometimes—but you need to know when to ask for it. 


Finally, self-awareness also encompasses the skill of self-confidence. You 
need to be able to trust yourself, knowing that you are capable. In being 
capable, you must be willing to put your best self forward. Understanding 
your own abilities and how well you think that you can do them, you are 
able to make proper judgments on what is doable for you and what you 
cannot do. It does not lack self-confidence if you turn down a job for 
legitimate means—if you do not understand how to do the job, the self- 
confident thing to do is to reject the job altogether because you know that 


you are not the right fit for it and you are not ashamed to admit it. 


Self-Management 


The second skillset involved in emotional intelligence is known as self- 
management. This will encompass all of the skills that determine how well 
you manage or control yourself, including how well you stay on task or if 


you are able to ever get anything done in the first place. 


Those with high self-management are quite self-controlled—they recognize 
that their own emotional maturity is critical and are able to control those 
feelings and express them in appropriate manners in appropriate settings. 
This is critical—it means that you are actively making it a point to make 


decisions that will keep you from behaving impulsively in any way. 


Beyond that, you are also quite goal-oriented as well. In knowing that you 
need to achieve things, you are able to make sure that you are always 
working toward them. You understand the value of goals and actively take 
advantage of them whenever possible. This skill is invaluable—it means 
that you are regularly able to keep yourself on track and organized enough 


to figure out how to get there. 


Further, that goal-orientation also comes along with the ability to be 
motivated. You have the initiative to keep yourself moving forward, even 
when you are not required to do so. You will move forward simply because 


you want to continue to better yourself in any way possible. 


You are also quite transparent when you are a self-manager—you are honest 
with everyone around you, even when that involves telling people that you 


have actually failed. You will always err on the side of honesty rather than 


trying to avoid annoying other people with lies and half-truths meant to 
disguise your own failures. You would much rather take the fall when you 
need to in order to make sure that you act with integrity. This, however, also 
brings with it a sense of optimism. When you know that you are going to be 
honest with your work and with those around you, you can admit when 
things are going wrong and act accordingly. Because you are motivated to 


keep working and moving forward, you find that the optimism comes easy. 


Social Awareness 


The third pillar of emotional intelligence is social awareness. This is your 
ability to understand other people’s emotional states just as you were able to 
learn your own. Effectively, it is self-awareness with some empathy 
sprinkled in for good measure to allow those feelings of understanding to 
extend to other people as well. After all, emotional intelligence is a social 
skill. 


The primary skill of social awareness is empathy. It is the ability to create 
connections with other people in a way that allows you to understand the 
emotions of others. More specifically, at this stage, you are developing a 
sense of emotional and cognitive empathy—this means that you are able to 
develop an understanding of what it is as a concept while also being able to 


relate to the feeling as well. 


People with high social awareness also tend to develop what is commonly 
referred to as the service orientation. This is almost like being a people- 
pleaser but without the negative connotation. When you are able to develop 
this service orientation, you will find that you are always happy and willing 
to help contribute. You want to ensure that those around you that would be 
reliant on you in any way for anything at all are cared for. Think of how 
when you go to a restaurant, the waiter’s job is to ensure that you have 
everything that you need—he facilitates your ability to enjoy a good meal. 
He seats you and takes your orders. He brings you drinks and delivers your 
orders to the cook. He ensures that you get all of your orders and makes 
sure that everything is exactly as you wanted it to be, and finally, he helps 


you pay and cleans up the mess afterward. That is a service orientation—he 


is there to serve. When you are emotionally intelligent, you develop a 
similar disposition toward helping other people. You find that helping other 
people comes naturally and that you want to always facilitate other people’s 
success as well. You will do whatever you can in order to ensure that other 


people are well taken care of and happy. 


Finally, when you have a solid sense of social awareness, you are inclined 
to recognize organizational awareness. This is your ability to accurately 
judge the people with whom you are talking to and scale your own usage of 
language appropriately. For example, imagine that you are going to be 
talking to people about road safety. You are going to have a very different 
conversation with 5-year-olds about road safety than you would have with a 
group of adults, and for a good reason—when you have that conversation 
with children, not only is their understanding of safety entirely different 
simply because they are younger, they are also not going to be driving a car. 
A talk to children about road safety would primarily encompass a 
discussion about ensuring that the children stay out of the road and do not 
cross the road without an adult or parent to facilitate. With adults, however, 
you may go into talk about what to do in inclement weather—many people 
do not know how to drive effectively in the snow, for example. You may 
inform people that what they need to do is get chains or snow tires or to 
explain that in certain weather, it is totally acceptable to slow down 
significantly to ensure that you are safe on the road as you drive. The ability 


to understand how to scale your speech to your target audience is critical. 


Relationship Management 


The final pillar of emotional intelligence is relationship management. This 
is effectively your ability to manage and facilitate the relationships between 
other people. You will effectively recognize these skills as the ideal leader 
skills in someone else. When you are effective as a leader, these tend to 


come naturally as a result. 


The first subskill of relationship management is becoming an inspirational 
leader. This can take several forms—just because you are inspirational does 
not mean that you have to be in the most authoritative role in the hierarchy. 
You can achieve this skill simply by modeling proper behaviors. You show 
that you are a good mentor that people can come to when they are in doubt 
or worried that they do not know what they are doing, and you can help 
facilitate them. 


Beyond that, you are also bound to be quite influential. In particular, you 
will be incredibly skilled when it comes to influence and persuasion without 
actively manipulating others. You will have such a way with words that you 
are able to efficiently and clearly motivate those around you just with your 


words alone. You do not need to make major promises or attempt to 


convince everyone else of what you want them to do—you can just get 
them to do it. 


On top of the ability to motivate with ease, you find that you also become 
incredibly skilled at mitigating conflicts. You are able to stop them before 
they can begin, but also to help settle any disputes that do arise. Because 
you are so skilled at looking at other people and how they interact with each 
other, you are able to figure out how best to improve relationships as well, 
and you are quite skilled at putting together teams of people that 


complement each other quite well. 


While you are solving conflicts, you may also run into situations in which 
you need to create change, and you are willing to do exactly that. In fact, 
you are more than happy to do exactly that, and you do so on a regular 
basis. If you feel that change is warranted, you will strive to make it 
happen, even if it is an unpopular opinion or if other people seem to look 


down on you for having that opinion in the first place. 


Finally, you are skilled at managing and leading teams. You are able to not 
only see how best to help others come to the realization that they can and 
should be working together to really see the best benefits, you also now 
recognize that there are ways to assemble your teems that will bring out the 
best in everyone. Not only that, you are willing to work with them as well. 
No job is beneath you when you are emotionally intelligent, and you are 
willing to do just about anything if it needs to get done. You are always 


happy to be a team player. 


Emotional Intelligence and Empathy 


While not one of the four key pillars of emotional intelligence, empathy 
deserves its own section for proper recognition. When you are empathetic, 
you are effectively quite capable of understanding and relating to other 
people with ease. You find that you have no struggles with figuring out how 
best to reach out to other people and find that you are regularly motivated to 


help. That motivation to help comes from empathy. 


Within empathy, when you become capable of both emotional empathy and 
cognitive empathy, you usually develop what is known as compassionate 
empathy. Compassionate empathy is your own ability to recognize what 
other people need and feel the need to help meet that need, if at all possible. 
Effectively, if you know that someone else is struggling around you, you are 
able to relate to them. It doesn’t matter what the struggle is; you feel like 
you can relate, and because you can relate, you want to help them in some 
way. That help may be giving food or money to the homeless person you 
see on the side of the road. It may be calling up a friend and offering to 
babysit for the weekend because you can see just how overworked she is at 
the moment. It could even be arranging for a fundraiser and meal train for 
someone going through a major medical event without them knowing about 
it. 


When you have compassionate empathy, you do not care what you have to 
do—you simply want to help other people, and you use that gift of empathy 
to do just that. This is a defining feature of being highly emotionally 
intelligent. In the lower pillars, it can be common for people to understand 
somewhat what someone else is feeling or why their feelings are important, 
but it takes true emotional intelligence for compassionate empathy to begin 
to develop. 


Emotional 
Empathy 


Cognitive Empathy 


Chapter 4: Emotional Intelligence and the 
Narcissist 


Now, if high EQ is so incredibly beneficial, what happens when there is 
little to no emotional intelligence in someone? Ultimately, the individual 
without much emotional intelligence often suffers from several important 
symptoms that can cause a serious upheaval in his or her life. Lacking 
empathy and basic social skills, they cannot relate to other people. Without 


any emotional regulation, they are quite impulsive. 


Now, before we continue to paint this picture of the individual lacking 
emotional intelligence, let’s stop and consider the narcissist for a moment. 
When most people hear the word “narcissist,” they assume that it is little 
more than a buzzword meant to generate clicks. However, that could not be 
further from the truth. Despite the fact that the name is derived from a 


myth, the actual disorder is a very real occurrence. 


What is NPD? 


Narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) is a personality disorder that is 
primarily characterized by a strange, distorted sense of reality. The 
individual suffering from NPD believes wholeheartedly that he is the best 
person present in the world. He acknowledges that out of everyone around, 
he is the best there is. He is perfection personified—no one can possibly be 
better than him. Since he is the best person in the world, according to him, 
he wants to be lavished in attention. He wants other people to acknowledge 


that he is the best and that no one can say otherwise. 


Of course, he says this with little expectation to prove it. He is so entitled 
that he believes that everyone else must just give him what he wants 
because he is that special. Ultimately, NPD is an incredibly destructive 
personality disorder that wreaks havoc on those suffering from it. If you 
suffer from narcissistic personality disorder, there is a good chance that you 
lack empathy, you are grandiose, you assume that you are deserving of 
attention, you believe that you are perfect and special, and you are going to 


manipulate anyone that gets in the way of any of those truths. 


Anyone who is on the outside looking in, however, knows the truth. Despite 
the fact that the narcissist’s overinflated ego is fed by his own entitlement, 
he is not actually deserving of that attention. He is likely not anyone like he 


attempts to present himself as. 


Ultimately, NPD is no joke. These people are manipulative, abusive, and 
will pretend to be someone that they are not simply because they want to 


get what they want. They will not stop at anything to get whatever else they 


have decided to get from other people. They are so self-absorbed that it 
does not matter what happens to anyone else. 


In particular, someone who suffers from NPD will present with several 
distinctive traits—they will lack empathy. They will be exploitative and 
manipulative in order to ensure that they always get what they want in the 
situation. They will make it a point to always focus on perfection. They will 
believe that they are uniquely special in the world and cannot identify with 
anyone else. They will have a grandiose view of themselves. They will be 
obsessed with power, and they will feel entitled to getting that power, no 
matter whether they earned it or not. 


Effectively, the narcissist is the antithesis of someone with emotional 
intelligence. 


Emotional Intelligence and the Narcissist 
If the person with high EQ is capable of empathizing heavily with other 


people, the narcissist is not. The high EQ individual is empathetic and 
giving by default, whereas the narcissist is demanding and selfish. The 
narcissist does not care what has to be sacrificed for him, so long as the 


sacrifice desired actually happens. 


If high EQ brings with it leadership skills and admiration, both things that 
the narcissist desperately wants, unfortunately, the narcissist lacks in both 
departments. The narcissist may strive to have those two end goals, but at 
the end of the day, his pervasive lack of empathy makes that impossible. He 
cannot make proper, real relationships with other people simply because he 


is incapable of relating to other people. 


Now, you may be thinking, emotional intelligence is the solution to 


narcissism, right? 


Unfortunately, that is a bit of a complicated question. When you are 
narcissistic, you believe that you are perfect and always right. Part of the 
personality disorder is the inability to recognize when you are at fault for 
something. Instead of being able to admit fault and move on with the 
attempts to try to better him or herself, the narcissist instead doubles down 
and insists that nothing is wrong with him. He believes that he is fine the 


way he is. 


However, remember that a major portion of the most basic functions of 
emotional intelligence were self-awareness and self-regulation. The 


narcissist has none. The narcissist does not accurately self-assess and does 


not see anything as a weakness—everything must be a strength at all times. 
The narcissist does not regulate emotions—if anyone angers him, he will 


lash out at anyone around without holding back. 


The narcissist is, effectively, almost untreatable because of these pervasive 
beliefs. In order for emotional intelligence to be effective, the narcissist 
would have to admit that he had a problem in the first place, and anyone 
familiar with a narcissist would know that would never happen. The 
narcissist is never going to admit fault or admit that something as 
fundamental as his personality was flawed with a disorder. 

Imagine for a moment that you are friends with a narcissist. You may be the 
most emotionally intelligent individual in the world, but if the narcissist is 
not willing to work with you, even your own empathy is not enough in the 
long-term to cope with the stress of the narcissist. The narcissist will always 
be so caught up in his own ego, demanding attention and support from other 
people and expecting lavish acknowledgment anywhere he goes, he will 
never be willing to put other people first. 

At some point, it becomes a matter of needing to move on past the narcissist 
without allowing it to bother you any longer. If you can do this, you will 
effectively allow yourself to step away from the disaster sooner rather than 


later. 


Yes, if you are emotionally intelligent or empathetic, this will go against 
any instincts that you have, which may be actively directing you toward 
helping the narcissist, but remember that helping will not do any good for 
someone who does not want to be saved. You can lead a horse to water, but 
you cannot force it to drink, and at the end of the day, the narcissist will 


never drink from any water that is meant to bring him back to earth. He 


would rather force the world to fit into his own method of thinking, 
expecting everyone else to make things easier for him rather than him 
having to change. He assumes that he is so incredibly valuable that people 


would do anything to keep him. 


Chapter 5: Intro to Cognitive 
Behavioral Therapy 


Emotional intelligence itself can be an incredibly valuable skill set to 
develop, but what happens when you run into roadblocks? What if you feel 
like you cannot possibly continue to move forward in your attempts to 
become emotionally intelligent because your emotional state is too out of 
whack? Maybe you find that your self-confidence is so incredibly poor that 
you cannot manage to even convince yourself that people actually 
genuinely like you. Maybe your anger keeps you down and you cannot 


figure out how best to regulate it. 


If you find that emotional intelligence becomes too difficult to push 
through, there may be an issue with your way of thinking. Luckily for you, 
you can fix that. All you will need to do is work through what is commonly 
known as cognitive-behavioral therapy. CBT is a technique that is regularly 
used in several different aspects now, sort of as a cure-all for many mental 
health disorders. People have seen improvements in several mental health 
issues with the use of CBT, ranging from depression and anxiety to even 


seeing a decrease in distress caused by schizophrenia. 


Even better, CBT is brief—the average session only lasts about 10 office 
visits, and then you are off on your own to keep managing yourself. Does 
this sound too good to be true? Despite how sweetly impossible that this 
sounds, it is legitimate and recognized by even the United States Military as 
a treatment plan for veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder. This means 


that CBT is an effective way to treat several different disorders while also 


being incredibly brief, making it a dream come true to many people that do 


not want to spend their lives in therapy. 


Within this chapter, we will go over the most basic features of what 
cognitive behavioral therapy is, how it works, and why it is frequently used. 
Try to reserve judgment until the end of the chapter—despite the fact that it 


does sound like it is too good to be true, it is legitimate. 


What is CBT? 


Cognitive-behavioral therapy is a form of psychotherapy. This means that it 
is primarily talk-based in order to get to the root of what is going on in your 
mind. However, it differs greatly from what you may be used to thinking of 
when discussing therapy. Unlike how in traditional psychotherapy 
appointments, you may be sitting there, discussing random aspects of your 
life for weeks or months on end, CBT instead encourages you to make a 
handful of appointments to learn how to cope with whatever is bothering 
you. 


Effectively, CBT cuts out the middle man—instead of having the therapist 
figure out what the problem is and how to solve it, the therapist teaches the 
patient how to figure out that information for himself. The therapist will 
provide the patient with information on how best to recognize the signs of 
whatever may be suspected, as well as guide the patient through several 
coping mechanisms that are meant to help deal with the negative emotions 
in order to end problematic behaviors. 


CBT is so incredibly effective for three specific reasons: It is brief, action- 
oriented and focused on the present rather than looking at past problems. 


Present 
focused 


Despite being brief, the patient is taught plenty of actionable information to 
help him or her cope with what is going on in life. They are taught to 
identify emotional states, understand what those states mean, and then learn 
to discredit those emotional states until they pass to avoid falling for any 


sort of impulsive emotional behaviors that could lead to problems later on. 


Along with being brief, it focuses specifically on actions. In CBT, you 
identify what the most problematic aspects of your life are and then you 
figure out how best to handle them. This may be through figuring out how 
to fend off anxiety, for example. If you are an anxious person, you may find 
that you are better off learning to treat that anxiety. That anxiety will be 
treated through methods like graded exposure or attempts to create 


affirmations or roleplays to eliminate the fear. 


Instead of essentially talking about the feeling until it no longer hurts ,;CBT 
seeks to figure out how to remove the power from the feeling altogether. In 


removing the power, it can no longer be harmful in the future, meaning that 


the problem is solved. However, the methods that are taught in CBT are 
open-ended—just because that one anxiety problem is over does not mean 
that anxiety will never plague you again in the future, and for that particular 
reason, the actions that you are taught are never assigned to one particular 
behavior. If you are anxious, you may find use of that affirmation 
assignment, but what about if you were frustrated? Would that affirmation 
still help? Maybe if you wrote new one about your frustration, but that 
would be a fantastic idea. They are meant to be useful in several contexts in 


order to maximize usability. 


Finally, CBT really only focuses on present-tense problems. While it would 
be foolish to believe that those suffering from anxiety have only had anxiety 
as a recent issue with a recent trigger, it is important to note that those who 
are suffering from anxiety should also be able to treat their current triggers 
without trying to figure out when it all started. After all, if the end goal here 
is to create strategies to cope with a specific symptom, does it matter when 
that symptom started? Does the cause of the broken bone really help the 


doctor re-set your bone or make sure that it heals, right? 


Of course, it would be foolish to completely disregard the past—the past 
can provide important information that is incredibly insightful into the 
situation, but at the same time, it is imperative to remember that solving 
past traumas is not always more important than figuring out how to prevent 
new ones. When you allow someone to develop a strategy toward healing, 
you are making it clear that they are able to cope in the moment. You make 
sure that if that person has a panic attack, those CBT techniques are there 


right then to help them out of that panic attack. Figuring out the direct cause 


and start of the panic attacks is not as important in the short-term, and CBT 


takes exactly that stance. 


How CBT Works 


Ultimately, CBT works primarily because it takes a close look at how 
behaviors and thoughts are innately related to each other. While it may 
intentionally hone in on behaviors, that is more because behaviors are far 
simpler to observe than any other forms. You can tell what someone is 
doing at a glance but you cannot always tell the emotional tone of someone 


just by their glance. 


This cycle between behaviors and thoughts actually has one more point—it 
is the thoughts-feelings-behaviors chart. Effectively, our thoughts influence 
our feelings. If you think that you are useless, you will feel like you have no 
self-confidence. Without self-confidence, you will not be willing to apply 
for that job that you really need. If you do not apply to that job, you 
obviously never get that job, and you are once again caught up in how 
horrible you are and how much you wish that you could change yourself 


into someone else. 


aay 


Actions Thoughts 


Feelings 


That means that the cycle has officially come full-circle. You thought that 


you were useless, felt like you were useless, were useless as a direct result 


of those thoughts, and then continued to use that as evidence of how useless 


you are. 


This is exactly why negative feelings can be so incredibly difficult to leave 
implanted in someone else—when they are there, that other person is going 
to have to work incredibly hard to get those negative feelings out in a 


process that is known as cognitive restructuring. 


Cognitive restructuring is effectively the backbone of CBT at this point—it 
is the ability to stop, analyze your own thoughts, and then change your own 
thoughts with other techniques. In doing so, you may find that it actually 
does, in fact, work. The reason it works is because it breaks into that cycle 
mentioned above—if negative thoughts make negative feelings, which 
makes for negative behavior, what happens if there is a shift to positive 


feelings instead? 


For example, what if you replaced the thought of being useless with a 
thought about trying hard to change your tendencies as a negative 
individual? If you were to change that particular thought, you would need to 
somehow get it implanted into your brain and then figure out the best way 


to constantly be reinforcing it. 


At first, that positive thought is in your mind, but you find it difficult to use. 
This makes sense—It is a difficult subject to approach and yet approaching 
it is the only right choice. So, after insisting that you are trying your hardest 
in life and seeing the girl from the bar that you failed to strike up a 
conversation with despite your desires to do so, you build up that resolve 


and approach her. Of course, just approaching, something you were terrified 


of doing, is enough to help you start to feel a little more confident and 


successful. 


Your thought processes begin to help you become successful. You find that 
the more positive language that you use, the more positive you feel. The 
more positive that you feel, the more likely you feel to actually behave in a 
positive manner. Effectively, then, you are able to defeat key issues in your 


life, one at a time. 


Do you have anxiety? You can figure out how to eliminate that anxious 
response from the internet or a book like this one. Are you lonely and want 
to find a date? You can do that too, so long as you actively go out of your 
way to try to do so. No matter what your mental health issue is, there is 
almost always a way that you can use CBT to better cope with it in some 


way or another. 


It is important to note, however, if you are going to be using CBT, it needs 
to be reinforced regularly. You want to ensure that it remains effective, and 
the best way to do so is to repeatedly flex the muscles that you would use 
involving CBT in the first place. This means that if CBT helps you with 
anxiety, use it with your anxiety symptoms as much as you can. Even if you 
feel like the symptoms are not that bad, try to use them. You will find that 
you are able to reinforce them better and more effectively simply by using 


them on the regular. 


Why CBT is Used 


Ultimately, CBT is used for several important reasons. At its root, what it 
does is identify and change negative thinking patterns and with that in 
mind, it is important to recognize just how powerful that is. Negative 
thinking patterns spread negativity throughout your life. The more 
negatively that you think, the more negativity you will find infesting your 
life. 


This is perhaps the primary use of CBT. However, think about all of the 
areas in your life in which negative thinking may hurt your behaviors? 
Imagine how you feel when your anxiety flares up—is there a negative 
thought behind it? Most likely. Do you have anger issues? There may very 
well be some negative thoughts underlying those as well. At the end of the 
day, the only way to know where the negative thoughts are is to figure out 
how to identify them—and CBT does that. 


Negative thoughts can cause all sorts of problems. You may find that 
negative thinking causes an eating disorder or a phobia. It could cause drug 
or alcohol misuse, or lead to struggles with all sorts of personality 
disorders. Effectively, however, the best way to figure out whether a 
negative thought is at the root of any reason that you are struggling is 


through plenty of self-reflection. 


Negative Thinking and CBT 


Negative thinking is typically quite rigid—you cannot change it despite any 
efforts that you make to do exactly that. No matter how hard you try, you 
may find that you are caught up in the negativity. Unfortunately, however, 
recognizing negative thinking is something that is incredibly difficult if you 
do not understand what you are doing. You need to be able to recognize 
your negative thoughts if you hope to ever have a chance to help eliminate 


them. 


When there are negative thoughts in your life, you may find that rather than 
actually recognizing the negativity, all you recognize is that life is going 
wrong somewhere for you. You do not see that the thought is at the root— 
just that nothing seems to work out. You may find that you are repeatedly 
rejected from job interviews, or find that you constantly struggle to get 
people to hang out with you. In the end, you find that you feel all alone with 


no clear idea of how to fix it. 


Finding the negative though in your life is probably the best, most clear-cut 
method to ensuring that you can identify the reason everything seems to be 
going wrong. The process to do this can take a while, but it is absolutely 
worth doing. 


To start, figure out when the last time that you were incredibly upset or 
angry was. Do you remember what caused the feelings? Write down as 
much as you can about the situation on the paper. Perhaps you remember 
that you were upset over the fact that your friend would not hang out with 


you again, after having already cancelled on you twice in the last week. It 


left you feeling incredibly upset and worthless, and in response, you 
spiraled into all sorts of negative thinking. You told yourself that you failed 
as a friend, and that is exactly why your friends keep bailing on you. You 
told yourself that you are impossible to get along with and that those around 
you will never want to. You may have told yourself that you hate who you 


are, which only pushed you deeper into negativity. 


Now that you have that out on your paper, ask yourself to summarize that 
entire paragraph written down to one sentence: “I am a bad friend.” With 
that thought in mind, can you figure out why it matters? What makes that 
thought so powerful? Why does it matter so much? The answer is likely 
something about how you feel like you are a worthless person or something 
along those lines. Ask why that matters, and continue to reduce down your 


realization over and over again. 


You want to keep asking yourself what that previous sentence says about 
you until you reach the point of having a sentence that is entirely about you: 


“T am a bad person,” for example. That right there is a core thought. 


A core thought is a thought that you have that underlies everything else. It 
is effectively the unconscious bias about a situation or setting that pushes 
you to behave in a certain way or to think in a certain way. In this case, your 
thought of being a bad person pushed yourself to think that your friend 
hated you, wanted nothing to do with you, and would have been happier 
with you gone forever. Was any of that actually true? Most likely not, and 


yet you could not help but think it anyway. 


Nevertheless, with that thought process in mind, it is important to write it 
down. Record that core thought and keep it close for now. You are going to 


be analyzing it to determine whether it is negative or simply problematic. 


Negative automatic core thoughts are effectively some of the most 
destructive that you can have, and if you are able to identify them, cognitive 
restructuring is always the way to go. You can do the restructuring in the 
process that is provided in this book, or you can attempt to do so with the 
help of a therapist. Ultimately, all that matters is that you succeed in 


eliminating the automatic thought once and for all. 


Now that you have your core thought written down, it is time to figure out 
if it is a negative thought or not. You can do this by simply running it 
through a checklist. This checklist will be your sort of cheat sheet—it will 
contain the most common forms of negative thinking patterns so you can 
cross-check your own core thought to determine if it is problematic. If it is 
problematic, you will want to change that thought as quickly and as 


effectively as you can without risking waiting too long. 


There are dozens of negative thinking patterns, but for the most part, they 
will fall into one of ten categories. These categories are all or nothing 
thinking, focusing on the negatives, pessimism, need for approval, negative 
self-labeling, catastrophizing, dwelling on the past, mind-reading, focusing 
on the should, and disqualifying the present. Each of these serves its own 
purpose. Let’s take a short look at each of these ten negative thinking 


patterns to get a good idea of what they are in action. 


All or nothing thinking involves you telling yourself that you must do 
things one way and anything short of that one perfected manner is a failure. 
If you do not get 100% on that test, then you have failed it. Effectively, this 


is perfectionism written into a thought. 


Focusing on the negative involves putting an excessive amount of effort 
into the bad part of a situation. If you had a date and it rained, for example, 
you may focus on all of the negativity—it rained, so you couldn’t go for 
that romantic walk. Your shoes got all wet and dirty and now you need to 
scrub them. The whole day and date were a complete failure. In reality, the 
other person was thrilled to spend the time with you and would have 


happily described the date as good. 


Pessimism is quite similar to focusing on the negative. Unlike how 
focusing on the negative was looking at the past, pessimism focuses on the 
future with a negative outlook. If something goes wrong, you constantly 
think that something bad is going to happen in response. If anything is 
successful, you believe it is for sure, only going to be temporary before 


falling apart as well. 


A need for approval is a definite sign of low self-esteem or major personal 
damage. When you need approval from other people, you feel like the only 
value you have is tied up in how other people see you. If you are not liked, 


you are not worthy of anything. 


Negative self-labeling is the act of telling yourself that you are something 
that is negative or bad. You may tell yourself that you are a waste of space 


or that you would even waste space in the garbage can and that your only 


value would be in disappearing. This is usually incredibly disparaging 


toward yourself and is incredibly harmful. 


Catastrophizing is the act of telling yourself that it will always be the 
worst-case scenario that happens. Things will never go well—you will 


always fail. 


Dwelling on the past is quite similar to focusing on the negative, but the 
difference is that when you dwell, you are actively telling yourself that the 
problem is in the past and that you cannot fix it. Instead of looking toward 
the future and seeing that there are solutions for you out there, you are 
actively avoiding making any real progress. Instead, you say that you may 
as well continue to beat yourself up over that mistake so you can eventually 
feel better. 


Mind reading is the mistake of deciding that you know exactly what is 
going through the minds of others. Instead of seeing that other people have 
privacy to their own minds and that there is no way you could ever figure 
out what is going on inside it without asking, and even then, you cannot 
guarantee anything, you decide that you know exactly what the problem is 
—you are the problem. You do not need any evidence for this; you simply 


decide that you are the problem because you know it. 


Focusing on the ‘shoulds’ involves getting so caught up in the fact that life 
should be fair and people should have access to the same basic amenities. 
However, life is not fair. It has never been fair. Some people win and some 
lose, and ultimately, you need to accept that. It sucks to not get what 
someone else gets, but that is life. 


Disqualifying the present is the exact opposite of focusing on the past. 
When you do this, you actively trap yourself into telling yourself that you 
will take care of yourself or do something for yourself in the future after 
you have already had the chance to figure out what was going on at that 


moment. 


With that list of negative thoughts, it is time to start figuring out how likely 
your own thought fits into one of the listed categories. If you say that you 
are a bad person, you are likely falling for negative self-labeling at the very 
lest. You are telling yourself that you are something that you are not. No 
one ever said you were a bad person. You also fell for the negative thinking 
of mind reading. Your friend never said why they canceled, and you 
assumed that it was because of you being a bad person and that it always 


happens that way. 


Effectively, the more time that you spend dwelling and trying to figure 
things out, the more negative thought patterns that you inadvertently dig up 


just through realizing that they qualify. 


In identifying that negative thought, however, you do make it clear that 


what you need is cognitive restructuring to destroy it. 


The cognitive restructuring process has several steps and does take time, 
but it is absolutely critical to beginning to defeat those negative thought 
processes once and for all. You can do it if you are willing and able to go 
through the effort. 


Begin by calming yourself down—you want to make sure that you are able 
to relax. You can do this through meditation or a breathing exercise if you 
want to, or you can simply wait until you are calmed down enough to begin. 
You can skip the next two steps if you have already gone through 
identifying negative thoughts. If you are skipping the identification of 


negative thoughts prior, you can continue. 


With a state of calmness, identify what caused the negativity in the first 
place. What happened? What triggered the negativity that you are feeling 
right at that moment? Write it all down for yourself—you want to figure out 
the moods that you had so you can begin to reflect on it later. After all, 
emotions are incredibly powerful. In this case, you may write down that the 
problem is that your friend stood you up and you feel angry, lonely, and 


embarrassed that you are constantly being canceled on. 


Next, it is time to identify your automatic thoughts. This was the step in 
which you made it through your natural chain of events with the argument 
with yourself. You told yourself that you were not good enough and 


eventually arrived at the conclusion of not being good enough. 


At this point, it is time to begin again if you have already worked on finding 


negative thoughts earlier in the chapter. 


You will be finding any evidence that supports the negative thought that 
you had. If you are such a bad person, how can you prove it? You will need 
to look at the situation entirely objectively and figure out how best to prove 
that thought to yourself somehow. Do your best to do this. You may write 


down that if you were left out, you were obviously not wanted by the group 


to begin with, along with some other comments that are meant to support 


whatever you have declared. 


From there you need to figure out if there is any contradicting evidence. 
What can you do to prove that thought wrong? How can you prove that you 
are not a bad person? This is important—this is where you start to 
acknowledge that the negative thought is wrong or flawed. You may tell 
yourself that your evidence is that people always say hi to you when you 
get to work, or that your cubicle neighbor brought you mini cupcakes and a 
balloon on your birthday. You may remind yourself that your friends do 
usually make time for you, but it is a busy part of the year, and you had 
admittedly canceled a few times as well simply because the business was 


just too much to keep up with at that point in time. 


As you write these thoughts down, compare them to the list of thoughts that 
you had set up for yourself as evidence of your negative thought. How 
much actually fits there? Was it actually fair to yourself to tell yourself that 
you are not liked, wanted, or that you are a bad person? Ultimately, it is 
incredibly unfair to you to put that standard on you, but you will arrive at 


that conclusion shortly. 


Now that you have your two lists, it is time to weigh them. Which side 
seems to be more accurate? In all honesty with yourself, you would have to 
agree that the thoughts being discredited seemed more rational, reasonable, 


and honest. 


At this point, you should feel a little bit better. You are able to remind 


yourself of exactly how the thoughts that you initially had were wrong or 


negative and should be avoided. At this point, it is time to try to help 
yourself continue to feel better. Write down what you have done and the 
end results of your process of self-reflection. See how you feel after doing 
that. Remind yourself that the balanced outlook was far better for you. Ask 
yourself how to avoid falling down that chain of negative thinking again in 
the future, and then remind yourself that it is important for you to offer 


yourself some compassion every now and then. 


Finally, to help reiterate your newfound viewpoint of the situation, it can 
help to create some affirmations. These affirmations will exist as your sort 
of reminder that things are not as bad as they may initially seem and that 
you can keep your thinking in the positive if you work at it enough. 
Affirmations will be addressed in-depth later in this book in Chapter 8: 


Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques to Eliminate Anxiety. 


Chapter 6: Cognitive Therapy and Behavioral 
Therapy 


Cognitive-behavioral therapy acts as a sort of bridge between both 
cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy. Drawing from both, it finds ways 
to understand and influence behavior in methods that would not entirely be 
possible without them both. Effectively, when you are using cognitive 
behavioral therapy, you are using one of the most powerful, influential 
forms of therapy for the time. It takes the best of cognitive therapy, 
recognizing that we are a sum of our thoughts and that our thoughts 
influence our behaviors. It also recognizes that our thoughts are directly 
influenced by the environment around us, one of the facets of behavioral 


therapy. 


When you are using CBT, you are effectively getting all of the benefits of 
both therapies at the same time, and the result is incredibly effective. It is 
difficult to argue with statistics that strongly support the effectiveness and 
veracity of CBT as a therapy—it is active and effective, allowing for the 
reconstruction of both thoughts and behaviors. In the end, in tackling both 
perspectives at the same time, people get a treatment method that is able to 


handle nearly anything. 


The best way to understand CBT, however, is to look at each of its 
components. Within this chapter, we will seek to understand both cognitive 
and behavioral therapies, allowing you to see what the main purposes of 
both of them are. In seeing the expectations and tendencies of both 
therapies outlined for you, you may realize that CBT is the sort of perfect 


blend between the two, and that is what makes it so incredibly powerful. 


Understanding Cognitive Therapy 


Cognitive therapy itself is best understood by the idea that the individual’s 
thoughts are influential to the individual’s feelings. Within this perspective, 
the emotional response felt is typically a direct response to a situation at 
hand. Effectively, your feelings are usually caused by your thoughts on a 


Situation. 


Imagine that you are greatly afraid of dogs. You were bitten as a young 
child and never managed to overcome the overwhelming fear that washes 
over you when you see another dog that is larger than a Chihuahua. In this 
instance, you have just found yourself exposed to someone walking a Great 
Dane down the road .The dog is perfectly well behaved, but you cannot 


seem to tolerate the sight of it. 


Your heart starts to race. You feel your breathing grow shallow and rapid. 
You look around you and there is no clear escape from the individual 
without dipping into someone’s yard and trying to get into an alleyway. You 
are effectively trapped. You can keep walking toward the dog, or you can 
walk in the same direction as the dog, but either way, you are going to be 


stuck in close proximity to it. 


Now, if you had randomly felt those symptoms sitting around and doing 
nothing, you may have been concerned that there was something wrong 
with you medically—it is always distressing to have that racing heart and 
the shortness of breath. However, in this instance, you are well-acquainted 
with the feeling—anxiety. You are feeling anxiety at the situation because 


you are afraid of the dog. 


In cognitive therapy, the therapist asserts that the reason that you are afraid 
is not that dogs are inherently scary, but rather because your thoughts about 
the dog make it scary. Effectively, your thoughts are directly swaying your 
feelings. You have negative thoughts surrounding dogs, stemming from the 
attack that you suffered, and despite knowing that, you can still never seem 
to overcome your phobia in any meaningful way. You still feel that same 


sense of panic when approached by a dog. 


Effectively, cognitive therapy states that the thoughts that you have 
surrounding that dog is biased and, therefore, not particularly suitable for 
functionality. You then build up your own negative thoughts surrounding 
the situation, and those thoughts color your emotions. This means, however, 
that you can tackle that fear relatively easily—all you need to do is figure 
out how best to address the situation. You can learn to process your 


thoughts in order to free your feelings once and for all. 


When you are in cognitive therapy, you are directly being taught by your 
therapist to develop new skillsets to help you. The skillset in particular that 
you will be learning includes several abilities and concepts familiar to 


anyone that knows their cognitive behavioral therapy. 


You will learn how to tell the difference between thoughts and feelings, 
which will enable you to remove the power from many of those negative 
thoughts as they arise. When you can tell the difference between the two, 
you can acknowledge that you are not actually frightened of the dog, you 


are frightened because you think the dog is scary. 


You discover the cycle in which thoughts, including automatic thoughts, 
influence feelings, and how that can be problematic if the thoughts that you 
have driving your feelings are negative. These negative or distorted 
thoughts can be incredibly problematic in nearly any context. They will 
make it next to impossible for you to actively manage the situations at hand, 
and correcting those thoughts is crucial if you hope to be able to manage 
your emotions. 


You will discover how to critically evaluate your automatic thoughts in 
order to determine if they are accurate or biased. In knowing that some of 
the thoughts that you are having are biased, you can begin to overcome 
them, defeating them with the reminders of their biased nature. Effectively, 
this teaches you to figure out how to interrupt and restructure your biased 
thoughts as they arise, allowing you to better your emotional state. 


Cognitive Therapy 


e Thoughts determine feelings 
e Understanding how thoughts 
influence feelings gives the 

power to defend against 
these feelings 

e Negative automatic thoughts 
are primarily at fault for 
neagtive feelings 


Understanding Behavioral Therapy 


Behavioral therapy, on the other hand, seeks to identify how any thoughts 
that you have get rewarded or reinforced over time, even if by accident. 
Within the behavioral therapy perspective, you are able to acknowledge that 
sometimes, we accidentally reinforce negative thoughts and biases, and in 


reinforcing them, we make them that much more likely to continue. 


For example, let’s go back to being afraid of dogs—you are terrified of the 
dogs that you encounter from day to day. This is typical. However, every 
time that you respond in a manner that is afraid of dogs, you avoid a 
negative interaction with the dog. This then leads to your fear of being 
reinforced. You may also run into the problem of reinforcing your fear 
every time you read an article online about how dogs have attacked or 
maimed people in your general vicinity. Overall, you constantly find 
yourself struggling to interact with dogs, and the longer your fear lasts, the 


longer you reinforce it. 


A slightly different version of this is in recognizing the ways in which you 
can run into a problem with children. For example, imagine that you have a 
child that regularly throws temper tantrums when he wants something. You 
do not want to give in to what he wants and you do your best to avoid it. 
However, occasionally, you feel like it is not worth the battle and you 
simply give in to the boy instead, feeling like it is preferable to the option of 
simply refusing and dealing with the headache surrounding standing your 
ground. Although you may see this as attempting to avoid a tantrum that 


you simply do not want to put up with because you are tired, your child has 


just been reinforced. You made it clear that if your child threatens to throw 


a fit, he gets what he wants. His behavior just reinforced his thoughts. 


Behavior Therapy 


è Behaviors that are 
reinforced get repeated 

e Negative behaviors have 
been inadvertently 
reinforced into being 
repeated 

e New behaviors must be 
encouraged to replace the 
negative ones 


When Cognitive and Behavioral Therapy Collide 

Now, consider what this means for CBT—you can see aspects of both 
cognitive and behavioral therapy in what has formed with CBT. In 
particular, you recognize that the cognitive therapy concept of thoughts 
influencing feelings being involved. You see that therapy is meant to be 
actionable and designed to restructure thoughts in order to change the 
feelings. When you restructure thoughts, you are actively engaging in one 
of the primary principles of CBT—you are making sure that you tackle 
problematic negative thoughts and turn them instead into something 


functional. 


Now look at behavioral therapy—in particular, you see the idea that 
behaviors reinforce thoughts. This is the last half of the cycle in CBT that 
involves thoughts, behaviors, and feelings. When you are able to 
acknowledge this cycle, you can begin to engage in all of the processes that 


CBT boasts as being it’s most effective. The behavioral portion of CBT 
encourages people to try new things, allowing for the creation of positive 
associations, such as through acts like goal-setting and behavior activation, 
in which you are able to actively begin to create new behavioral patterns 
and reinforce them, allowing them to become as automatic as the negative 


ones. 


Essentially, CBT wanted to combine the two, bridging the gaps and making 
use of all techniques and possibilities. Within CBT, you see that people are 
taught to restructure their own thoughts, but they are also taught to avoid 
reinforcing negative thoughts. You are able to ensure that you are actively 
working toward bettering who you are, what you want, and how you will 
get it all because you will be tackling the problem from two different 
perspectives to ensure that the end results are as effective as possible. 


yioral 


Thera 


Chapter 7: Anxiety 


Imagine that you are sitting at home, minding your own business when your 
heart starts to race. You had been just fine moments prior and now you 
cannot help but feel that sense of panic and dread within you—you cannot 
shake the feeling that you are being followed, watched, or being threatened, 
and no matter how much you walk yourself through the logic of why you 
are safe and not needing to worry, you find that the feeling of dread will not 
pass. You do your best to mitigate it, and yet you cannot help but feel like 
you are stuck. Your best attempts do nothing and you begin to wonder if 


you are actually dying, in danger, or otherwise threatened or compromised. 


In reality, you are perfectly okay, physically. You are feeling the sensation 
of anxiety. This is your body’s natural response to stress, during which you 
are actively afraid of what is to come. Your anxiety triggers could be 
anything—arguing, bills coming due, or even an offhanded comment 
toward your partner about something entirely irrelevant to everything. What 
is true and constant, however, is the overwhelming, terrifying sensation that 


you are in real danger. 


When you are anxious, you are suffering from a mental health disorder. 
This does not mean that you should feel ashamed—you cannot help that 
your body is reacting in this way. However, you can reclaim your body and 
begin to treat it. This chapter will guide you through understanding anxiety 
as a disorder, walk you through the most common disorders there are, and 


then discuss how CBT is a valid solution for those suffering from anxiety. 


In the next chapter, you will be provided with three techniques that you can 
use in order to begin taking back your life and fighting off that anxiety once 
and for all. While it can be intimidating to try to figure out how to help 
yourself, know that you are doing the best that you can by making an effort 
to heal who you are and change the patterns through which you will live 
your life. You will be able to heal yourself and ensure that you are able to 


be happy and healthy once more. 


What is Anxiety? 


Anxiety is, first and foremost, a feeling. It is the feeling of apprehension 
and fear of what is going to come next. You fear what will happen and react 
accordingly. Effectively, your mind is on overdrive, feeling like there is a 
threat, even if that threat is imaginary. In response to that threat, your body 
has several options. It can choose to fight, it can choose to flee, or it can 
choose to freeze. Typically, when you are suffering from anxiety, your body 
has chosen flight as its proper response—it wants to get you as far away 


from the situation as possible by making you as uncomfortable as possible. 


Essentially, anxiety is a state o nearly constant vigilance. When you are 
afraid for your life, you are not going to be able to rest—you will actively 
be searching for any signs that you were correct and that there really is a 
threat to your safety present somewhere nearby. When you are able to 
remain vigilant, you are effectively making it a point to defend yourself 
from all angles. 

However, keep in mind the massive amount of stress that this would put 
anyone under. When you are stressed out about how to approach people, or 
even just how to live life, you are not going to be very happy. You are going 
to struggle in nearly any interactions, constantly worrying about whether 
this will be the one to trigger your anxiety or make continuing on with your 
life impossible. Very quickly, that anxiety spirals out of control, and you 


find that it is impossible to remain clearheaded and capable. 


Of all the mental health disorders that you could ever have, anxiety is the 
most common. It is pervasive—it arises over the course of several different 


interactions and in several constant situations. It is problematic—it makes 


normal functioning impossible. Finally, it is also debilitating. It is possible 
for those who suffer from anxiety to find that instead of being able to 
protect themselves and ensure that they are taking care of themselves, they 


are going to be suffering from those feelings of fear and trying to escape it. 


Anxiety Disorders 

Anxiety exists in a multitude of forms. You can have panic disorder, in 
which certain stimuli actively trigger you to panic and act as if your very 
life is being threatened. You can have a phobia or social anxiety. Ultimately, 
at the end of the day, the end result is still the same: You are still afraid of 
what is going to happen and you are still struggling to figure out how best 
to cope. When you are actively afraid of what is around you, you can hardly 


expect to function effectively. 


This section will help you identify several of the most common anxiety 
disorders. As you read, however, keep in mind that the information included 
in this chapter does not substitute for a proper, licensed medical 
professional’s diagnosis and opinion. If you think that you may be suffering 
from anxiety, the best course of action is always to make sure that you get a 
proper diagnosis from a medical professional who has had the opportunity 
to both understand your symptoms through interacting with you, but is also 
able to supervise over the process of treating you. While it is great to use 
this book as a guide, it is even more beneficial to your treatment plan to 
seek professional medical advice from someone that can see the whole 


picture and interact to create something tailored to you specifically. 


Panic disorder is a common anxiety disorder in which people experience 


repeated panic attacks entirely unexpectedly. These attacks are sudden, 


powerful, and incredibly draining, leaving the individual feeling like he or 
she may be dying when in reality, their anxiety is creating symptoms that 
are incredibly reminiscent of cardiac arrest. People who suffer from panic 
disorder find that they suffer from at least one panic attack per month, and 
they are beginning to be fearful of the idea of having another panic attack. 
Effectively, knowing that there is an opportunity for another panic attack is 
enough to trigger more anxiety. These panic attacks show up without 
warning, with symptoms such as heart palpitations, struggling to breathe, a 
sensation of choking, lightheadedness, dizziness, and chest pain, among 
others. These symptoms usually arise with no discernable reason and occur 
in ways that are incredibly powerful. They leave the individual functioning 


in fear of another attack. 


Phobias are another form of anxiety that manifests as an irrational, 
excessive fear of one specific trigger. This trigger could be something 
physical, such as a specific animal or person, or it could be a bit more 
abstract, such as the fear of a thought or the fear of a feeling. In fact, some 
people even find that they may end up living in fear of leaving home, 


something else that can be incredibly problematic. 


When you suffer from a phobia, you are not just slightly afraid of whatever 
is happening—you are deathly afraid of it. For example, consider the 
scenario of being afraid of dogs. If you are so afraid of the dog that you let 
it control your life, intentionally and deliberately avoiding the dog by 
crossing the street or changing your routine, you may suffer from a phobia. 
Most of the time, these phobias do directly impact your ability to function. 


They interfere with your ability to recognize situations in a healthy manner. 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder is what most people usually think about 
when they think of anxiety—it is characterized by random bouts of feelings 
of anxiety that are oftentimes unpredictable, while other times being quite 
obvious. When you suffer from generalized anxiety disorder, most of the 
time, you cannot help it. You cannot figure out how best to function and 
cannot shake the feeling without help. Thankfully, that help is available to 
you. If you feel like you suffer from a constant overarching feeling of 
anxiety that you cannot explain, you are not alone, and you do not have to 


suffer endlessly. You can treat this problem. 


Post-traumatic stress disorder is the development of severe anxiety 
symptoms in direct response to some sort of trauma. It is not known exactly 
what causes PTSD to arise, as not everyone who has suffered a trauma goes 
through it. When you suffer from PTSD, you find that you have an intense 
avoidance of anything even remotely reminiscent of whatever trauma you 
have experienced. You may suffer from intrusive thoughts, such as 
flashbacks or nightmares related to the trauma, or you may find that, despite 
your best attempts, you cannot shake the need to obsessively avoid anything 
reminiscent of the trauma in the first place. Keep in mind that, while 
commonly associated with the military, you do not actually have to serve in 
the military to suffer from PTSD- -any trauma, ranging from sexual assault 


to surviving a major accident can result in the symptoms. 


CBT and Anxiety 


Ultimately, CBT is an incredibly effective method through which you can 
treat your anxiety. When you use CBT to tackle your anxiety issues, you are 
tackling the issue from two ends. You spend time identifying problematic 
thoughts that may have become distorted over time, and you also spend 


time actively attempting to reinforce positive behaviors. 


If you are actively suffering from anxiety, cognitive behavioral therapy is 
one of the best therapies you can choose in order to alleviate the symptoms. 
Through CBT, you will learn how to act accordingly—you will be given 
several tools for managing those feelings of negativity and anxiety to 
remove the discomfort and distress that goes along with them. For example, 
if your anxiety tends to express itself through the massive feelings of panic, 
a racing heart, and a fear of dying, CBT can help you eliminate the distress 


behind those symptoms. 


Effectively, CBT would teach you that it is okay to feel that way, but 
ultimately, your anxiety is little more than feelings to begin with. This 
means that if you want to treat it, there are several options for you. You can 
choose to use affirmations to remove the discomfort, reminding you that 
you are safe. You can choose to expose yourself to your triggers in hopes of 
desensitizing yourself form the symptoms altogether. You can even choose 
to spend time practicing through several worst-case scenarios in order to 


figure out the best possible approach to your symptoms. 


No matter what you choose, however, there will always be the option to 


revisit another method if necessary. You will be able to choose to instead 


behave in other ways and slowly habituate those new behaviors. Over time, 
you will see relief. While it may have been difficult to first begin the 
process of treating your anxiety, you should always remember that it takes 
real strength to treat a mental health disorder and that you should not be 
ashamed under any circumstances. Rather, you should be proud of yourself 


to be willing to give yourself a chance. 


Chapter 8: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
Techniques to Eliminate Anxiety 


Once diagnosed with anxiety, you may wonder what comes next. Luckily, 
what comes next is effectively just skills building. You will be spending the 
time to learn new skills that you can use to claim and tame your anxiety 
once and for all. These three methods of treatment, the ability to create 
affirmations, graded exposure, and using what-if roleplays will all be 
particularly effective in ensuring that, no matter what the situation, you are 
able to tame that anxiety. Even if you have not yet been diagnosed, but you 
feel le you are probably well on your way to getting that diagnosis, it can 


really help to begin to process of tackling those anxiety triggers early on. 


From here on out, it is assumed that you are already familiar with the art of 
identifying problematic thoughts—this ability to use introspection will be 
crucial to your ability to succeed. Since this process was introduced in 


Chapter 5, you should already have a general idea of how best to identify 


these thoughts. When you know what your problematic thoughts are, you 


can begin to tackle them. 


Affirmations 


Affirmations are little more than short statements that you repeat to yourself 
during a moment of weakness. Effectively, your affirmation should directly 
counter a negative thought that you are suffering from in a way that helps 
you to stay focused on what you want and grounded to your truest emotions 
instead of just trying to squeak past the sensation of anxiety in the first 


place. 


In particular, affirmations are one of the simplest methods that you can use. 
All you need to identify is to ensure that it meets three simple requirements. 
You must make sure that your affirmation is positive—it must be something 
that is written in a way that it will not further sink your thinking into the 


negative. 


Your affirmation must also be present-tense—it needs to address something 
in the here and now in order to help you in the present. For example, if you 
are afraid of dogs, you need to make sure that your affirmation addresses 
that you are safe right at that minute when you are reciting your affirmation. 
In ensuring that you know this, you are able to recognize that the 
affirmation is true without denying it on some sort of grammatical 


technicality. 


Finally, your affirmation must be personal. When your affirmation sari 
personal, you can make them come true. When they are not personal, 
however, and they are actively about other people, such s telling yourself 
that your friends or family members love you, you can begin to doubt that. 


That is not to say that your friends and family do not love you, but rather, 


you have no way to verify the mind of someone else, and in the moments 
of doubt, when your mind is already lying to you, that would be an easy 
topic to lie about. You would be able o tell yourself that no, you do not 
believe that your friend loves you because you cannot prove it, and 


suddenly, your perfectly crafted affirmation falls apart. 


When you would like to use affirmations, you must simply make sure that 
your statement lives up to those three requirements. If it does, you are ready 


to move on to the next step—using your affirmation. 


When you are ready to use the affirmation, you must make sure ultimately 
that you repeat the affirmation regularly. It is a common form of 
manipulation to effectively insert thoughts into the mind of another with 
ease, with the only requirement being that you need to repeat it so much 
that it becomes the truth. This means that if you actively repeat the same 
positive message to yourself over and over again, you should be able to 


convince yourself to sort of absorb the knowledge to use it. 


The best way to do this is to pair your affirmation with an activity that you 
are already doing regularly. Perhaps you decide to repeat whatever your 
affirmation si every single time that you wash your hands. After all, you 
likely wash your hands on a regular basis throughout the day and you need 


to make use of that. 


When you wash your hands, you must then repeat that affirmation to 
yourself at least ten times. Every time you wash your hands, you then repeat 
that affirmation. Over the days, weeks, and months, you find that you are 


constantly repeating it to yourself and over time, it becomes reflexive. 


Every time that you wash your hands, your affirmation is repeated to 
yourself out of habit, despite not thinking about it. That is when it really 
begins to work—it has infiltrated your unconscious mind and will then 


begin to act accordingly. 


On top of the repetition in order to internalize everything, you must also 
make it a point to use your affirmation during moments of weakness. If you 
find that you are afraid of a dog, you recite it to yourself in order to remind 
yourself that the fear that you have is unwarranted or unnecessary. Over 


time, you do begin to believe it. 


Graded Exposure 


Graded exposure refers to essentially what is commonly known as exposure 
therapy. In graded exposure, you are making it a point to slowly expose 
yourself to whatever it is that you are afraid of in hopes of slowly removing 
the fear that you have. You do this through incremental increases in your 
exposure to the item or stimulus, getting closer and closer to the stimulus 
over time. For example, you start out by looking at photographs of big dogs 


playing outside to start. 


As you go through graded exposure, you are going to slowly acclimate to 
each exposure level, and in doing so, you will eventually be able to tolerate 
that level of exposure. Every time that you find that you can tolerate the 
exposure, it is time to up the increment to the next level, allowing you to 


then push your limits and continue to become more and more comfortable. 


For example, you start with those photographs of dogs. You are to view 
them regularly until the simple sight of a dog is not enough to send your 
heart racing. Then, you must move on to looking at videos of dogs. This 
should bring back more of your anxiety as it is slightly more realistic than 
actively looking at a photograph. In looking at the videos, over time, you 
will find that you are able to comfortably tolerate it. You are then ready to 


move up another level. 


You may then choose to hold a stuffed animal dog in order to sort of expose 
yourself further to the stimulus. Doing should still be uncomfortable for 
you, but the more you go through this process, the more smoothly you will 
find each of the stages to be. 


After the plush dog, you then move on to seeing actual dogs in action. 
Perhaps you stand on the other side of a fence from a small dog that is calm 
and well-behaved so you know it will not be charging at you in an attempt 
to get you to do something or to harass you. After a while, you are able to 
move on to actually approach the dog, and eventually, you may even find 


that you are comfortable petting it. 


From there, it may just be a matter of exposing yourself to larger and larger 
dogs, slowly working your way up to having a dog that is quite large in 


your presence without the triggering of your anxiety symptoms. 


If you do this the right way, you will eventually find that you can, at the 
very least, tolerate the presence of a dog. You may never be fully 
comfortable around the dogs in your life, but that is okay. What is important 
is ensuring that you are not living your life in hiding because you are 
terrified of being around other people’s pets. Ultimately, whether you like it 
or not, dogs are incredibly common and you must be able to put up with 


their presence in the real world. 


When you use graded exposure, you are effectively teaching yourself that it 
is okay to be afraid, so long as you can be comfortable in your fear. Usually, 
graded exposure is used in tandem with other techniques such as grounding 
in order to add a level of security. With techniques such as grounding, you 
will find that you are able to better cope with all of the negativity that 
otherwise threatens to overwhelm you. In being able to cope with the 
negativity, you will find that you can actually combat and counter your 


phobias through this technique. 


What-If Roleplays 


Finally, the last technique for mastering anxiety involves figuring out what 
the worst-case scenario in a situation actually is. From there, you must role- 
play it out in order to figure out if it is actually as bad as you may initially 
be convinced. For example, imagine that your anxiety surrounds ordering 
drinks at the café. You know that you need the drink, but you are too shy to 
order, fearing that other people will judge your taste in drink. Because of 
this, you tend to avoid cafes altogether, despite having a massive caffeine 


addiction. 


When you use a what-if roleplay, though, you are effectively asking 
yourself probing questions that are designed to identify whether you can 
actually trust your judgment. You may be thoroughly convinced that the 
idea of ordering a coffee is the worst thing possible because you just know 
that you will mess up their special schema of how they size the drinks and 


everyone will laugh at you. 


Effectively, your anxiety tells you that you cannot possibly order a drink 
because it will flare up your social anxiety. It is then your job to ask 
yourself what the worst-case scenario is. You would likely identify the act 
of everyone laughing at you as the worst-case scenario and then move on to 


say that everyone around you only wants to use you for entertainment. 


Now, in trying to figure out what-if, you must now ask yourself what that 
would matter. Does it matter why the people may laugh? Does being 
laughed at really matter? Ultimately, no, not really. While being laughed at 
is distressing, it is not distressing enough to warrant rearranging your entire 
life to accommodate for it. In this instance, then, you find that you are far 


better off moving forward with desensitizing yourself. 


Chapter 9: Depression 


Along with anxiety, depression can be a debilitating mental health issue. 
Commonly known as major depressive disorder, depression tends to 
encompass the feelings of hopelessness and despair that would otherwise go 
along with the feelings of inadequacy that an individual may be suffering 


from. 


Imagine that, no matter how comfortable your current home, job, or life, 
you cannot feel any joy. You find that the day is largely meaningless to you 
and that the night is not much better. You know that you should have 
energy, but all you want to do is spend your time lying in bed and refusing 
to do anything at all. You are far happier just left to your own devices in bed 


without doing anything. 


Depression is harmful. It causes people to struggle with motivation as well 
as finding hope and joy in life to continue moving forward. When you feel 
depressed, you struggle with anything and everything to do with other 
people and with yourself. Most people tend to think that depression is one 
of those willpower things—all you need to do is pick yourself up by your 
bootstraps and continue on. However, remember, the root of being able to 
pick yourself up from your bootstraps was meant to mock an impossibility. 
Just as you cannot literally pick yourself up from your bootstraps, you 


cannot just will yourself out of depression. 


What is Depression? 


Depression is an intense sadness, with feelings of worthlessness and 
hopelessness. It is characterized by at least five symptoms within a two 
week period of time. These symptoms are primarily a lack of energy, such 
as being depressed during the day, especially in the morning, or feeling like 
you lack energy. Other symptoms relate to how you feel about yourself— 
when you are depressed, you tend to feel like you are worthless or guilty 
regularly. It also had several physical aspects as well—you may struggle to 
sleep regularly, or you feel like you sleep too much, or you feel like you are 
slow and sluggish, or you start to see changes in your weight. There are also 
aspects such as suddenly having a frequent thought about death or even 


suicide. 


Ultimately, several of these symptoms come together when diagnosing 
depression, and they are incredibly problematic. These symptoms leave you 
feeling restless and like life is no longer enjoyable. You may find that you 
are suffering from several physical symptoms, such as being uncomfortable 
in your body, having headaches, struggling with digestion, or generally just 
hurting. You may find that things that once brought you joy, such as 
hobbies, enjoyable food, and sex are no longer of any interest to you, and 
you would much rather withdraw from the world rather than facing anyone 


head-on. 


This is problematic. When you are able to fall into depression, your quality 
of life plummets and you are at an increased risk of thoughts of self-harm or 
suicide, both of which are incredibly dangerous. In fact, because self-harm 
thoughts are so common with depression, you must be ready to recognize it 


for what it is—a medical emergency. Any time that you feel like you may 


be a danger to yourself or other people, you should always contact 
emergency services to ensure that you get the care that you need to survive 


and thrive. 


Keep in mind that depression, while it is valid, is different than sadness or 
grief. It is possible for sadness or grief to eventually turn into depression, 
but noting that difference early on is critical. You must be able to recognize 
that oftentimes, depression begins with the arrival of a negative event of 
some sort. You may have lost a family member or gone through a messy 
divorce. In response, it is normal for you to feel sadness. In fact, sadness 
and grief are entirely normal human emotions. However, it is not normal for 
grief and sadness to be entirely consuming. At some point, grief transforms 
from something normal into something that is directly hindering your 
ability to function in the world around you. You may have lost someone 
dear to your heart, and that can be incredibly crippling, but you must not 


lose your ability to function in society as well. 


While grief does not follow a timeline that determines a normal amount of 
time to heal and a normal diagnosis for depression, it does become 
problematic when, even a month or two later, your mood is still so poorly 
impacted that you struggle to interact with those around you. Instead, you 
find yourself withdrawing and refusing to engage, and that can be 
incredibly problematic. If you find that your grief seems to be changing into 
something all-consuming instead of something that is meant to be part of 
your healing process from a point of negativity into positivity, it is time to 
speak to a professional. Help is out there if you are willing and ready to 


reach out a hand. 


Remember, even if you are suffering from depression, it can and will get 
better. There are plenty of treatment options for people suffering from 
depression, from medical to therapeutic, to even making lifestyle changes. 
If you work closely in tandem with a doctor or other medical professional 
that is familiar with you and your case, you will find that you are able to get 
the relief that you need from your depression. It may take you time to 
develop, such as waiting for the medication to build up enough to help, or 
to make sure that you actively have enough therapeutic skills to actually 


make use of, but you will see improvements in your life, little by little. 


Types of Depression 


Depression is not a one-size-fits-all diagnosis. In fact, there are several 
different depressive disorders that exist, and understanding the different 
ones is critical to recognize what is going on in your life and ensuring that 
you are able to treat yourself. In particular, let’s take a look at unipolar 
major depression, dysthymia, and postpartum depression to get a better 
understanding of how depression can and does present, and what can be 


expected from it. 


Unipolar Ms ostpartum 
y nipolar Major pysthivinia Postpar tum 
Depression Souci! Depression 


e Defined by e Persistent (at e Happens after 
major episodes of least 2 years) childbirth 
deep depression e Mild, but nearly ə Believedto be 
and a lack of constant-- you relatedta 
energy or suffer from fluctuation of 
motivation depressive hormones 

* Can be symptoms more 
intermittent or oft enthan not 


constant 


Unipolar Major Depression 

This is the form of depression that most people think of—it is the 
depression that is heavy and overreaching, clouding over everything in your 
life. It may last for a shorter period of time, such as a few weeks to months, 
or it can happen intermittently in life. You may have periods of calm, during 
which you do not have very many symptoms, but you will also commonly 


find that you run into having several symptoms all at once, making it major. 


Dysthymia 
Dysthymia refers to mild, persistent depression that lasts for years. It is 


always overshadowing your life but generally presents itself in manners that 


are far less harmful than unipolar major depression. Still problematic for 
sure, it is not something that you should overlook, but generally, it is 
considered less severe. When you live life with dysthymia, you are 
chronically mildly depressed. Anything that you do or say will constantly 
be shadowed over by your depression, and while you may not be majorly 
depressed or suicidal on the regular, you are likely to still feel quite down 


on yourself, low on energy, and unwilling to get moving on a regular basis. 


Postpartum Depression 

Believed to be brought on due to the influx of hormones that women go 
through right after giving birth, postpartum depression is incredibly 
common. In fact, it has become a regular part of screening at women’s 
postpartum exams precisely because people tend to develop it and it is 
easier to ensure that you are screening everyone early on rather than waiting 
to see how other people report their feelings. Unfortunately for the women 
that suffer from PPD, what should be the best time of their lives, welcoming 
their newest bundle of joy, becomes overshadowed with low emotions, 
sadness, inadequacy, and feelings of hopelessness that can be 
overwhelming. Postpartum depression is commonly treated with medication 
and therapy during the postpartum period, but this form of depression 


usually goes away before the infant born during this birth leaves infancy. 


Depression and CBT 


Depression is commonly treated with CBT. Because much of depression 
does exhibit itself in a behavioral manner, it is quite possible to effectively 
create good habits that can and will motivate an individual into successful 
functioning. While this will not eliminate the negative feelings per se, it can 
act as a way to bridge the gap, allowing the individual to begin acting in a 


better-adjusted manner. 


Through behavioral activation, new habits can be developed and learned. 
These get the individual back into a routine, and with the development and 
enforcement of the routines, it becomes clear that the habituating to action 
once more can really help allow for that initial push over the lack of 


motivation. That is critical in ensuring the actual activation of new habits. 


Depression is also commonly coped with in figuring out if there are any 
negative thoughts that are holding the individual down. It is possible for 
someone with depression to think about himself in manners that are 
incredibly negative. This, of course, does nothing to help the individual do 
any better. It is incredibly difficult to feel good about yourself if you are 
actively telling yourself that you are a terrible, worthless person and then 
acting upon those thoughts, and for that reason, CBT seeks to identify and 
defeat any of those negative thoughts before they can truly corrupt the 


individual’s mind. 


In correcting these mindsets, it is possible that the individual can start to see 
some improvement in their own mentality as they progress through CBT. 


They can develop more and more skills that enable the individual to cope 


better with issues that arise. They can help the individual begin to 


reacquaint himself with these actions that are critical to success. 


If you feel like you are suffering from depression, one of the best things that 
you can do for yourself is make an appointment with your primary care 
physician to identify whether you may actually be suffering from the 
impacts of depression. If you are, there are ways that you can begin to help 


yourself, and doing so will help bring joy to your life once more. 


Chapter 10: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
Techniques to Eliminate Depression 


With that said, it is time to address three of the most common cognitive 
behavioral therapy techniques that you can use in order to directly begin to 
alleviate your symptoms of depression. Please remember, if you are 
currently taking any medication for depression, do not stop suddenly and do 
not change the regimen of your medication until you have spoken to your 
doctor about your proposed changes. Changing medication can be 
incredibly finicky, especially if you have already discovered several 
methods that are working for you, and you deciding to change that routine 


that you already have can to more harm than good. 


Nevertheless, within this chapter, we will address three techniques that are 
used in treating depression within cognitive behavioral therapy. We are 
specifically addressing successive approximation, goal setting, and activity 
scheduling. Remember, while many aspects of CBT focus on changing 
thought processes, what is often the most effective for those suffering from 
depression is to use techniques that specifically target behaviors. If you can 
directly challenge those behaviors, you can begin to better cope with the 
situations at hand. You can essentially take advantage of the fact that people 
are creatures of habit and that your body will naturally want to shift into a 


series of habits that you are actively making use of. 


Successive Approximation 


The first method that will be discussed is known as a successive 
approximation. It is quite similar to the act of exposure therapy. However, 
the primary difference is that instead of being designed to create tolerance 
of a specific stimulus you are trying to create and trigger specific behaviors 
in someone else. You effectively want to make sure that you are building up 
to a certain behavior while also rewarding yourself for the successes that 
you do have. 

Effectively, this will involve you starting out with a goal. With that goal in 
mind, you break it up into several manageable steps. For example, say that 
you want to be able to run 3 miles without feeling like you are dying. You 
may start with a goal of running % a mile without stopping. You work on 
this, and every time that you succeed, you give yourself a treat. That treat 
should be something that is incredibly motivating for you—perhaps you 
promise yourself that if you can run the mile, you can spend some time 
actively playing on some video games that you have and that if you get to 


the 3-mile goal, you will buy that new game that is coming out soon. 


That week, every time you run % mile, you reward yourself. Eventually, 
you will find that your body is adjusting. Running that % mile no longer 
seems so intimidating or impossible, and that is when you know that you 
are moving your goalpost further toward your goal. Now, you must run 34 
mile before you are willing to give in to your reward. Eventually, that 
becomes easier as well, and you will continue to shift your goal until you 
finally do achieve the 3-mile limit that you have set for yourself. Upon 


arriving at that 3-mile goal, you reward yourself with that game. 


The entire purpose behind successive approximation is to get yourself 
moving in the right direction. This is like rewarding your new puppy when 
she approaches her new leash on the floor when you are trying to accustom 
her to it, and you slowly move the milestone until she is happily prancing 
about next to you on the leash. Yes, this means that you are effectively 
training yourself into obedience—but if it is good enough for most animals, 
why not for humans as well? Besides, it cannot be that bad if you are 
actively training yourself. You are simply relying on several of the tactics 
that are commonly recognized by the behaviorist perspective in psychology 
and that is not necessarily wrong or problematic—you are making sure that 


you are bettering yourself. 


Goal Setting 
When you are able to set good goals, you may find that your goals suddenly 


become a whole lot more attainable. Setting goals, then, is not as simple as 
just saying that you are going to do something and then making it a point to 
do so. For example, you cannot say that you are simply going to get a job 
paying $100,000 a year without ever coming up with a goal that spells out 
exactly how you would achieve that in the first place. It is imperative that 
you are able to figure out exactly why and how you will do something 
beyond just stating that you will do something; otherwise, it becomes 
incredibly difficult to actually find the motivation to stick to your guns and 
follow through. 


Perhaps one of the easiest ways to set goals that are actionable and can be 
achieved is the use of SMART goals. Standing for Specific, Measurable, 
Achievable, Relevant, and Timed, these are goals that are specifically 
designed in a way that takes out the vast majority of your planning. After 
all, little can be as intimidating as having to come up with a solid action 
plan when you are trying to achieve something. Having a plan that you feel 
is not quite secure or proper is not always the most motivating way to set 


your goal, and for that reason, we will take a look at SMART goals. 


When you set a SMART goal, you are looking to set a goal that meets each 
and every one of the checkboxes next to specific, measurable, achievable, 
relevant, and timely. This means that you may need to put a bit of thought 
into how you will achieve your goal, but if you play your cards right, you 


can do so in a way that is beneficial to everyone involved. 


Specific goals are exactly what they sound like—goals with a well-defined 
purpose. You know exactly what you are doing when you set a goal to be 
specific. For example, imagine that you are actively trying to run more 
often. You may say, “I want to run,” as your goal, but is that very specific? 
It does not tell you much more about your goal other than you simply want 
to make sure that you are running at some point. However, it does not tell 
you much about ever actually achieving that goal of running. When you 
make it more specific, though, you say, “I want to be able to run 3 miles 
straight without stopping.” Now, you have an ending point—you know 
where your goal wraps up and you know that you should be able to make it 


happen. 


Measurable goals are goals that have some defined ending. They usually 
exist in some manner that you can measure to check your progress. In this 
instance, your goal of running three miles already included a measurable 
aspect—you have set it up in the distance that you would like to run. 
Sometimes, however, it is not quite so clear-cut. If you want to stop being 
angry, for example, you may need to set a goal so you are eliminating a 
certain portion of blowouts per day or some other way to shift your goal 
from something relatively vague into something measured. However, by 
and large, you will find that most of your goals will become measured by 


the nature of setting the goal in the first place. 


Achievable goals are goals that are actually possible for you to achieve. It 
does not matter so much here whether you want to achieve the goal but 
rather looking at your own capabilities. Do you want to climb Mt. Everest? 
Do all of your body parts work properly? If you have a problem with an 


ankle or your back, for example, you may want to overlook the idea of 


going on that trip to climb the mountain because it is not actually as 


achievable as you may like. 


Relevant goals are goals that you actually care about. These goals are the 
ones that truly matter to you for some reason. A common way to check 
whether your goal is relevant or not is through asking yourself if you 
actually want to achieve whatever it is that you are setting out to do. If you 
are entirely uninterested in the goal, then it is likely not very relevant to 
you. For example, if you already run 6 miles a morning, running a 3-mile 
morning does not seem like a stretch or an accomplishment—all because 


they are in her norm. 


Timed goals are goals that have an end somewhere. They have some sort of 
cut off that determines whether or not you were actually successful in 
achieving your goal. For example, you may give yourself two months of 
practice to be able to run that three-mile track, and if you do not do it by 
that two-month mark, then you forfeit the challenge and prove that you 
cannot do it. When you have reached the end of the timeline that you have 
set out to achieve, you need to be able to determine whether or not you 


were actually successful. 


In following these steps, you will find that your goals are actually far more 
reachable. It becomes far easier to actually achieve your goals when you 
know how to structure them for success. Effectively, then, you are setting 
up so you know that you are able to approach a situation in a manner that 
enables you to be far more successful in your life. It may be a pain to work 
on your goals initially, but you will find that doing so is imperative to your 


ability to actively work on what you are trying to work on. 


Activity Scheduling 


Finally, activity scheduling refers to the art of intentionally scheduling 
activities throughout your day to do. You may, for example, decide to 
continue working on being able to run those three miles. In this case, you 
would actively schedule in time to work on your running at the regiment 
that you have set up for yourself. You will effectively be doing your best to 
schedule those activities in and meet them. When you do meet your 
activities that are scheduled for the day, you will then be able to use any of 
the extra time that was not used up to achieve your goal for the day to do 
something that you enjoy. 


This method is quite similar to the method of successive approximation, but 
in this case, you are rewarding your progress toward achieving a goal. You 
are ensuring that other people are likely to want to follow your lead 
because, as you begin to use this, you find that being organized is actually 


far easier than you may think it will be otherwise. 


To do this, all you must do is come up with some sort of schedule and 
follow it. If you can do so, you are pushing yourself to develop good time 


management skills, and that will also help you bolster your own emotional 


intelligence as well. 


Chapter 11: Insomnia 


Despite the fact that children everywhere hate the idea of sleep and reject 
the idea of taking naps whenever the option is presented, adults all around 
the world wish they could go back to those days where sleep was not a 
limited commodity. With how busy the world is, how several aspects of life 
are now 24/7, and how much work gets crammed into such short periods of 


time, people everywhere find that they are not getting enough sleep. 


However, what about the people who, despite how much they may wish to 
sleep, cannot manage to do so? These people may desperately want to fall 
asleep, spending plenty of time in their beds as they toss and turn, wishing 
for sleep to take over, but it never comes. These people suffer from 
insomnia. No one ever wants to be on the receiving end of insomnia, but 
when it strikes, it can be incredibly frustrating. When you are desperate to 
be able to get a few extra hours of sleep, lying in bed without any luck can 


be one of the greatest slights of the universe. 


What is Insomnia? 


Insomnia is a sleep disorder—this means that it is characterized primarily 
by disordered sleep patterns that cause significant issues to the individual 
suffering from it. When you suffer from insomnia, you may either struggle 
to fall asleep, or you may struggle to stay asleep. This means that either 
way, you are missing out on incredibly valuable sleep. After all, the average 
adult needs at least 8 hours of sleep a night to remain functional. When you 
do not get that sleep, you run the risk of all sorts of health issues, as well as 
the risk of falling asleep intermittently throughout the day. In fact, you may 
even fall asleep at the wheel in your car, which can be incredibly dangerous, 
not only for you but for everyone around you as well. When you fall asleep 


at the wheel, you can cause fatal car accidents for everyone involved. 


Ultimately, insomnia can be summed up as four symptoms, with at least one 
needing to be present in order to warrant a diagnosis of insomnia. These 
symptoms are struggling to fall asleep, struggling to stay asleep at night, 
waking up too early, or feeling tired, even after sleeping. With these 
symptoms, you will find that you are constantly exhausted and dragging, 
and no matter how hard you try, you struggle to function. People are not 
designed to function without sleep—in fact, losing even just four hours of 
sleep in a night can have the same impact on you as having a beer before 
driving. You need to be getting proper sleep if you want to be properly 


functional, but for those with insomnia, that is an impossibility. 


Forms of Insomnia 
Ultimately, there are two distinct forms of insomnia—primary and 
secondary. These are determined quite simply. Primary insomnia refers to 


people that are struggling to sleep without any associated physical cause. 


Effectively, nothing physical seems to point toward the reason for the lack 
of sleep. Secondary insomnia, on the other hand, is typically caused by 
something else. It can be caused by physical ailments, such as a physical 


issue like cancer or arthritis making it impossible to sleep. 


The difference between the two is primarily whether insomnia is the 
problem or a symptom of a larger problem. When insomnia is the problem, 
insomnia itself can be treated. However, when the insomnia is a symptom 
of another problem, sometimes the best course of action is to treat the 


symptom. 


Insomnia can further be classified into either acute or chronic insomnia 
based upon how long it has lasted. When you are suffering from acute 
insomnia, you have had it short-term. Effectively, it lasts for anywhere from 
one night to a couple of weeks. However, it quickly becomes chronic, or 
long-lasting, when it is recurring for at least half of the week for longer than 


a month. 


Causes of Insomnia 

In understanding the causes of insomnia, you can begin to understand how 
best to treat it. If there is an environmental cause of insomnia, for example, 
you can treat the environment to best figure out how to fix the problem. If 
the problem is behavioral, you can change those. If the problem is due to 
medication, those can be changed as well. Effectively, there is usually some 
sort of cause to the insomnia that people feel—it is simply a matter of 


figuring out what that cause is so it can be addressed somehow. 


Acute insomnia is usually caused by something short-term and 
environmental. For example, a significant stressor can cause insomnia—a 
trauma, a loss, moving, or anything else that drastically uproots your entire 
life can then lead to insomnia. The discomfort of being sick can also lead to 
short-term insomnia, especially if you are suffering from being unable to 
breathe and struggling to avoid hacking out a lung. Other times, physical 
discomfort can make it impossible to sleep—perhaps you are in bed with 
your two toddlers and they have you jammed against the wall with your 
neck bent funny so you cannot possibly get comfortable enough to fall 
asleep. The environment can also directly impact your ability to sleep in the 
short-term—if your neighbors are loud or your power is out so your heater 
is off and it is cold, you may struggle to fall asleep. Much more harmlessly, 
you can also see insomnia as a direct result of jet lag—just getting home 
from a trip to the other side of the world can cause you to suffer from 
insomnia. 

Chronic insomnia, on the other hand, is typically linked to more persistent 
causes. You may be suffering from chronic stress that keeps you up at night 
—perhaps you cannot quite make ends meet, or you are getting through a 
cancer diagnosis. Maybe you are depressed or anxious and find that you 
cannot quiet your mind enough to fall asleep. When these occur, treating the 
insomnia becomes a bit more difficult—you must be able to alleviate the 
suffering in some way. If you are stressed, you need to figure out a way to 


manage it. If you are in pain, you should find a way to manage that as well. 


Treating Insomnia 
Despite how tempting it may be to reach for that bottle of wine or beer 
before bed to help you relax enough to sleep through your insomnia, this is 


ill-advised—firstly, treating yourself with drugs is never healthy. Secondly, 


all this will do is worsen the quality of the sleep that you do get. Even if 
you are desperate to get some much-needed sleep, you are far better off 
looking at other methods to get it, such as figuring out how to meet with a 


doctor to see if you need a prescription. 


Generally, unless your insomnia is becoming so problematic that you are 
starting to struggle to function, you are better off trying to figure out how to 
use good sleep hygiene to help yourself get that sleep. However, if you are 
finding that your functioning has been impaired, you may find that you are 
best served by taking some temporary sleeping pills that can help you fall 


asleep quickly. This is generally the advice for acute insomnia. 


For chronic insomnia, you must first figure out what the underlying causes 
are. It is always possible that there is some physical reason for that 
insomnia to be so problematic, and if it is found to not be a physical cause, 


you may be referred to behavioral therapy. 


Insomnia and CBT 


In particular, CBT can be incredibly effective at teaching exercises that will 
aid in the falling asleep of those who otherwise would struggle. There are 
several techniques that can impact the behavioral side of your mind in order 
to trigger you to finally be able to begin falling asleep regularly again. If 
you have always wanted to get back into that ability to sleep again, 
speaking to your therapist would be a fantastic starting point. Within the 
next chapter as well, we will look at three different techniques common in 
CBT that will help treat insomnia. These teach behaviors that are designed 


to promote better sleep hygiene and help you fall asleep. 


Chapter 12: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 


Techniques to Eliminate Insomnia 


While sleep aids are always an option for those suffering from insomnia, 
many people prefer to avoid them. They may dislike the impact of the 
medication that they take, disliking that they feel groggy when they wake 
up, or they may find that they end up doing things that they regret the next 
morning, such as going on an online shopping spree for random items that 
they do not actually want nor need. When this happens, the individual can 
be quite stressed out and embarrassed—what if they spent money that they 
need to have refunded? What if they sent messages to other people that 


shouldn’t have been sent? 


If you feel like you would like to sleep better and more soundly but without 
the impact of sleep aids, there are options for you. You can instead learn 
how to eliminate insomnia with behavioral therapy training that can really 
aid you in figuring out how best to address your situation. You can learn 
how to be cognizant of how to get to sleep while also focusing on doing so 


without having to make any major dietary or medical changes to your life. 


In particular, this chapter seeks to introduce you to three techniques 
common in CBT that can help you eliminate the impact of insomnia in your 
life. First, you will learn about stimulus control. Then, you will take a look 
at sleep restriction, and finally, you will learn a relaxation training method 
to help you relax into sleep when you feel like you otherwise will not be 
able to fall asleep. With the help of these techniques, you should find that 


falling asleep begins to come easier than ever, allowing you to once and for 


all settle back into your comfortable routine and enjoy those good nights’ 
sleep that you have missed out on for so long. 


Stimulus Control 


When you look at the world through the behaviorist’s eyes, you are seeing 
things through the belief that everything that you are exposed to directly 
impacts what you are doing at any given point of time. Effectively, your 
own behaviors are constantly just reflections of your surroundings. When 
you are able to recognize this, you will see just how important controlling 


your surroundings can be to sleep. 


When you are struggling to sleep, the first place to check is often your sleep 
hygiene. What are you doing before bed? Are you using a regular schedule? 
Are you using caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol before going to sleep? Are 
you eating food that can lead to indigestion? Is your bedroom simply not 


conducive to sleep? 


When you seek to use stimulus control, you are effectively becoming 
incredibly strict with what you are willing to expose yourself to in the last 
half of the day. You may refuse to drink soda or have any sugar or caffeine 
after 2pm in hopes of everything that you had consumed being out of your 
system by the time that you are ready to sleep. You may make it a point to 
exercise during the day in order to help your nighttime sleep. 

The most effective form of stimulus control of all, however, is developing a 
proper sleep routine and making sure that you have a comfortable sleep 
environment that is designed to be conducive to sleep. In order to do this, 
you must first be willing to cut out all caffeine, spicy food, and blue light in 
the last half of the evening. Blue light comes from your screens, such as 
your cell phone, tablet computer, or even your television—the light can 


prevent you from being able to fall asleep because it directly interferes with 


your own body’s mechanics that are designed to help you wind down to 
sleep. You must make it a point to cut off all blue light at least one hour 


before bed and set a rule that no screens will be used in the bedroom. 


During that hour before bed, make sure you expose yourself to stimuli that 
will be relaxing. You will effectively condition yourself to fall asleep by 
teaching your body that those are the predecessors to bedtime, so when you 
begin that bedtime routine, your body will begin to produce the right 
hormones to help you fall asleep. You may decide to take a warm shower, 
read a book, and then settle down in bed in the dark, free of screens, while 


also making sure that your room is cool and comfortable. 


If you are willing to restrict the stimuli that you expose yourself to, you will 
find that sweet sleep coming in no time. It may take a few times to get your 
body on the same page, but as soon as it is, you will not be able to deny the 


difference—just being able to fall asleep will be a huge improvement. 


Sleep Restriction 


Sometimes, what you need to do in order to help yourself get back on 
schedule is what is called sleep restriction. This is exactly what it sounds 
like—you will restrict your ability to sleep during certain times to 
effectively teach yourself to sleep at night when you should be. This can be 
particularly draining and difficult, however, because you will have to be 
making it a point to staying awake even when the need to sleep threatens to 
overwhelm you because you need to stay awake until it is your proper 


bedtime. 


When you begin sleep restriction, you will start by limiting your time in bed 
to only the hours that you are currently asleep, making sure to log your 
sleep patterns. You are allowed to spend only those sleeping hours in bed at 
first. If you are only sleeping 3 or 4 hours a night, then you are only 


allowed to spend time in your bed during those 3 or 4 hours. 


From there, you must set a wake time and bedtime based upon your current 
sleep time. If you are only averaging 5 hours of sleep in bed and you 
determine that you must be awake by 6am every day, this means that you go 
to bed every night at lam. No matter how much sleep you have gotten, you 
must always get up at 6am for the next several weeks, while also going to 
bed at the same time. Even if you feel tired before 1am, you must stay 


awake until then for the training to work. 


You will then follow this schedule for at least two weeks. After the two 
weeks, you can start getting in bed 15 minutes earlier on a nightly basis 


until you are comfortable with how much sleep you are getting. Over time, 


you will find that you will either figure out how much sleep you need to get 
and find a nice equilibrium point between how much sleep and when you 
get that sleep. 


Relaxation Training 


Finally, sometimes, you cannot fall asleep no matter what you try. Within 
CBT, there is thankfully a type of training that you can use in order to begin 
relaxing in order to fall asleep. This is known as relaxation training. You 
will effectively be triggering to the brain that it is time to relax based upon 
the cues that you are sending. In manually making it a point to relax your 
own body, little by little, you will eventually trigger your body to also want 
to relax on its own and fall asleep. This will effectively override any 
feelings of danger that are keeping the brain on overdrive and potentially 


preventing you from being able to fall asleep. 


To begin, you will want to get yourself comfortable in bed. Make sure that 
you have spent an adequate amount of time following your sleep routine 
and making sure that you have prepared accordingly. As you get into bed, 
make sure that your room is dark, quiet, and suitable for sleep. Find your 
comfortable spot and take in a deep breath as you do so. Feel the breath 
travel through your lungs and fill your body with life-giving oxygen. 


Exhale and then focus on the top of your head. 


Do you feel any tension? If your scalp feels tense, try to release it. If not, 
slowly scan down your body starting from the top. Anywhere that you find 
tenseness, you must manually encourage relaxation. Perhaps you find that 
your jaw is clenched because you are stressed. With a deep inhale, relax the 


jaw and allow yourself to settle down deeper into the mattress. 


Keep scanning your body. Every place that you notice tension, gently 
release it, allowing each part of your body to relax, little by little. As you 
work your way through your body, calming anywhere with tension, you will 
feel the progress. You will feel the sensation of relaxation within you. 
Continue to release the tension all the way down to your toes, and when it is 


all gone, remain motionless in bed. 


While you lay there, focus on your breathing. Take in a deep breath for four 
seconds. Hold it for a moment in your lungs before slowly exhaling as well, 
allowing yourself to release the air from your chest and begin to relax. 
Continue this process while focusing entirely on your breathing. Any time 
that you notice tension building again, release it and continue. You want to 
be as relaxed as possible. If your room is conducive to sleep, you should 


find that you fall asleep soon. 


Chapter 13: Anger 


Everyone feels angry from time to time. It is a normal human emotion with 
a very good purpose—it seeks to defend us. However, anger is also perhaps 
one of the most destructive emotions that people can have. It is entirely 
possible for people who are angry to fly into a blind rage, utterly losing 
control of themselves and behaving in ways that are incredibly dangerous. 
People have been known to eve kill during these periods of time, so 
incredibly blinded by their all-consuming rage that they did not realize what 


they were doing until it was too late. 


Ultimately, anger is useful in moderation. If it is not in moderation, it 
typically errs on the side of destructive and problematic, and for that reason 
learning to cope and control your anger is one of the best skills that you can 
learn if you hope to be a positive influence that is capable of interacting 


with other people, no matter what the capacity. 


Within this chapter, we will address anger as an emotion—we will look at 
its purpose and why it is commonly triggered. We will also take the time to 
understand what happens when anger becomes problematic and the signs 


that you or someone you know may have an anger management problem. 


What is Anger? 


Nearly everyone feels anger at some point—that boiling, white-hot fire in 
the chest and the sudden need to fight back. Anger itself is one of the 
primary emotions that humans have—it is an emotion that is rooted entirely 
in protection. When you are angry, you are going to behave aggressively, 
and for a good reason. Do you remember the discussion of emotions as 
motivators for various functions to aid in survival? Anger is one such 


emotion, and it is one of the most powerful of them all. 


Anger is primarily defined as feeling negatively toward someone or 
something that you have perceived has wronged you in some way. It is 
essentially your way to protect and enforce your own boundaries to ensure 
that people do not take advantage of you. In moderation, it does exactly that 
—it can be a proper alarm bell to key you in to the fact that you are being 
taken advantage of or otherwise used. You will be able to tell that 
something is not quite right if it brings you to anger without you having to 
do a thing. You simply feel infuriated. If you do not know what the problem 


is, it is time to do some close introspection to figure out what is going on. 


As a primary emotion to help ensure survival, your anger is critical to 
protecting you in certain situations. In fact, you are likely to be angry if you 
feel like your needs are not being met in some way. If you are hungry, you 
are more likely to snap, or if you feel like you are threatened, you may feel 


that inclination to snap at other people. 


Ultimately, however, every person deals with anger in a different manner. 
Some people are incredibly patient to a fault—no matter what happens to 
them, they are able to remain calm and level-headed. In particular, this is a 
skill set that is strongly valued in emotional intelligence—the ability to self- 
regulate is critical if you want to be able to manage yourself and other 
people, after all. 


Other people, on the other hand, find themselves enslaved by their anger, 
always giving in to whatever impulses they have. This can be incredibly 
problematic, as we will discuss shortly. 


Anger and Motivation 


Anger is a form of motivation—it motivates us to protect. Effectively, when 
you are angry, you recognize that there is something threatening about your 
situation and you seek to fight it. You know that you are facing some sort of 
injustice or threat—perhaps someone took advantage of you and ran away 
with your belongings. Maybe you were trusting your best friend to help you 
with something, only for your friend to cancel on you again. You feel like 


you are betrayed, and that sense of betrayal leads to anger. 


Anger is effectively your fight response—if you feel the impulses of anger, 
it is usually because you are angry at someone or something and you are 


trying to figure out who or why. 


Your anger, when it is expressed, is usually in body language. When you are 
angry, you will look the part—you will stare threateningly and you will not 
likely back down if challenged. Effectively, you are preparing for a fight 


and you expect the other person that is threatening you to as well. 


While anger may have initially been a basic instinct to help protect oneself 
and family, it has become more. We are no longer threatened on the regular 
with a need to fight to the death, but the feeling of anger when we are 


feeling betrayed is just as strong as ever. 


When you are prone to anger, you may find that you have several common 
triggers that you cannot escape. Even if you know that your anger or 
frustration is illogical or unwarranted, you cannot help but feel angry. Some 


of these causes can range from feeling grief and sadness after losing 


someone to feeling like someone around you has done something that is 


less than respectful. 


Of course, anger can also arise due to stress, a lack of control, or even 
unmet physical needs. Needs like the need for food, sex, or water can lead 
to anger and short tempers within people, leading to them being far more 
likely to lash out at other than they otherwise would be. It is important to 
recognize that people can feel angry for a wide range of reasons, and if you 
find that you have angered someone, it may be worth the effort to figure out 
where the communication disconnect is. If you cannot identify the 
disconnect, you may need to instead focus on how best to step back from 
the situation until the other party can calm down. Especially if you or the 
other person is known to have an anger problem, it may be smart to engage 


in all conversations when everyone’s anger has subsided. 


When Anger Becomes Problematic 


Ultimately, like with most areas in life, anger becomes a problem when you 
are no longer able to control it. If you find that your anger causes you to say 
or do things that you regret, you may find that you have an anger problem. 
Unfortunately, uncontrolled anger s surprisingly common, and it is also 


surprisingly unhealthy, both physically and emotionally. 


When you are angry, your body automatically gears up for a fight due to the 
fact that anger is the primary emotion behind the fight response. This means 
that your breathing increases, your sensation of pain goes down, and your 
heart rate and blood pressure skyrocket. You effectively prepare to fight to 
the death, even though what you may be upset about is actually completely 
trivial at best. You may be getting all worked up over a joke, for example, 
or the fact that someone else got to the parking spot you had been eyeing 


while waiting for a woman and her children to cross the road. 


Ultimately, if you want to determine if you have anger issues yourself, you 
may want to focus on some serious self-reflection with the following 
questions to consider in mind: 
e Do you often feel like you are angry? 
e Is your anger often out of control, despite your best attempts to 
manage it? 
e Do you think that your anger is hurting your relationships with 
other people? 


e Do you find that your anger causes you to hurt other people? 


e Do you regret what you do when you are angry once you calm 
down? 
e Do you have a tendency to hurt other people, physically or 


emotionally, when you are angry? 


Answering yes to any of those questions can be incredibly telling that there 
is, in fact, some sort of anger issue going on in your life. As devastating of a 
realization as that may be, it also means that you can figure out how best to 
address the world around you from then on. If you know that you struggle 
with your anger, you can begin to treat it and work on techniques that you 


can use to help eliminate that struggle. 


Chapter 14: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
Techniques to Eliminate Anger Issues 


Once you have identified that you may be struggling with your anger, it is 
time for you to begin understanding what comes next. In particular, you 
may be wondering how best you can cope with those feelings of anger as 
they arise? What can you possibly do to help the situation around you? How 


can you prevent your anger from getting worse when you do feel it? 


Because oftentimes, when people are angry, they are not thinking clearly, it 
becomes critical to figure out how best to address the situation when you 
are calm. If you can put together a plan to help you manage your anger 
when you are calm, you will often find that following that plan gets 


infinitely easier when you are in a situation that calls for it. 


In particular, this chapter will introduce you to three methods common in 
CBT to helping manage anger issues that may arise. Remember that 
ultimately, the method that you use to control your anger is your own—all 
you need to do is find the one that works best for you. The best anger 


management is the anger management that does its job well. 


Also, remember that just because you still feel angry sometimes even with 
the implementation of these tools does not mean that they are not working. 
Keep in mind that anger is a very real, very normal emotion and you should 
consider the fact that it is normal for people to feel. You do not need to be 
ashamed of feeling anger—what matters is that you know how best to 


control it to avoid running into any issues later. 


the three techniques that you will be addressing within this chapter are 
anger disruption, cognitive change, and an attitude change with an emphasis 


on forgiveness and acceptance over the situation at hand. 


Anger Disruption 

When you are angry, you usually struggle to recognize it in the moment. 
Sure, you may be aware of the sensation, but you are rarely cognitively able 
to remind yourself, “Hey, I’m feeling angry—lI better not do that right 
now!” Instead, you find yourself swayed by the need to continue with the 
yelling and the demanding despite knowing that it is not the best possible 


way to move forward. If this sounds like you, you are not alone. 


This is why many people take advantage of anger disruption. Anger 
disruption is the ability to effectively interrupt your anger in some way, 
shape, or form. Usually, this is done by removing yourself from the 
situation and avoiding the stimulus that is frustrating to you at that moment. 
Some people may call this running away, but keep in mind that choosing to 
temporarily remove yourself in order to calm down is not cowardly or 
running away—it is choosing to avoid escalation. It can be good to discuss 
this technique with those that you are close to beforehand so they know 
what you are doing in the heat of the moment. After all, if you are angry, it 
is quite likely that they are also frustrated to some degree and they may 


want their own sort of resolution to the situation. 


There are several different ways that you can manage this technique. For 
example, you can avoid the distressing stimulus altogether. If you are 
fighting with your spouse, walk into another room and pick up something 
else to do. Perhaps you choose to fold some laundry or do the dishes—you 


chose something neutral to do while you wait for the feeling to pass. 


You may also have an internal method to remove yourself emotionally from 
the situation, such as telling yourself that you will always take a deep breath 
and count to ten before responding when you are angry. Yes, this may draw 
out some conversations, but it will allow you to weigh your options and 


what you are saying well before you say it. 


Keep in mind that while removal is a great way to manage your emotions in 
the moment, it does nothing to fix the problem or help you gain more self- 
control over yourself in the future. You may still be just as readily angered 
as you have not done any work on what has been angering you at that point 
in time. This is very rarely a strategy that can be used alone—it must be 
used in tandem with other aspects, such as cognitive restructuring in order 
to come up with some sort of method of addressing those negative feelings 
that you have. In addressing those negative feelings, you may find that you 


are actually able to protect yourself further. 


Cognitive Change 

Sometimes, the best thing that you can do when you are angry is find a way 
to manage and shift your mindset away from anger and onto something that 
is far more productive and useful to you. For example, if you are angry, you 
are going to be so caught up on what is and is not fair that you are not likely 
to think very clearly when you are being walked through why you did not 
get the result you were looking for on something. Maybe you are angry 
because the store was sold out of the specific item you wanted after you 
Saw someone else walking away with that particular item that you had set 


out to buy. 


When you get upset by a situation like this, it can be incredibly easy to find 
yourself caught up in the fact that things went wrong. Instead of seeing that 
you were simply unlucky, you somehow turn it into some sort of grievous 
insult against you—you were intentionally left out of getting that item and 
that it must have been your bad luck again. You may even go so far as to 
insult the person who bought the last of the item because you are being 
driven by your anger and feel the need to scream and yell your frustrations. 
Your mind is caught in the loop of negativity, and you need to figure out 
how to best push your mind out of that angry, negative perspective toward a 


perspective that is far more rational and calmer. 


One such way to change your cognitive state is to use silly humor in some 
way. You may not laugh initially, as no one enjoys laughing at themselves 
or making themselves feel dumb or silly. However, this type of cognitive 


change seeks to make the situation humorous in some way, shape, or form 


in order to sort of shock the mind out of that angry state of mind and into 
one that will be able to handle the situation better. 


For example, imagine that you are frustrated over not getting that last item 
at the store. Under your breath, you mutter that the person is a selfish pig as 


you walk away in frustration. 


The other person must have heard you because she turns around shrugs, and 
says that her name is, in fact, Portia, which means pig, and she is quite 


happy to keep her item, thank you very much. 


The absurdity of the situation gives you pause as you realize the irony of it, 
and the sudden shock is enough to help you shift from that moment of toxic 
anger into one that is mildly amused by the way the universe played that 
situation out. In the end, you apologize for calling the lady a pig and go on 


your way. 


Acceptance and Forgiveness 


Finally, let’s talk about both acceptance and forgiveness. Stop and think for 
a moment about what it is that makes people angry. Usually, either it is 
some sort of inconvenience, or it is because they are causing some sort of 
problem for you some other way. When you learn to accept the situation for 
what it is and move on, however, you may find that the anger melts away 


almost effortlessly. 


For example, imagine that your child ran through the family room with a 
glass of milk, something that is against the rules of your home, and spilled 
milk all over the carpet and sofa. However, instead of telling anyone, he 
snuck away and pretended like it never happened—until the smell of rotting 


milk was a dead giveaway. 


You may immediately feel angry—you now have yet another mess that you 
have to clean up that you would much rather not deal with. You are 
frustrated at your child for not listening and wishing that they would have 
listened to you all along, or at the very least, that they would not have 
hidden what they were doing from you. They could have asked for help to 


clean up the mess before it had a chance to fester. 


One way that you can stop that anger, however, is to stop, remind yourself 
that it was not intentional, and move on. You are basically accepting what 
has happened for what it is—an unintentional accident that was handled 
poorly and moving on. You are effectively moving away from the idea that 


your child had intentionally ignored your rules or dumped the milk to spite 


you, which you may have initially felt. Instead, you focus on the accident 


and move on. 


When you do this, you effectively put an emphasis on understanding the 
other person’s perspective. They may have done something that triggered 
your anger, but why did they do what they did? If you are able to stop and 
consider things from their perspectives instead of from your own, you may 
find that you are actually far more likely to accept and put up with it. You 
are more capable of moving forward simply because you are able to 
recognize the other side and show some compassion that you may hope 


would be shown to you if you had made a mistake as well. 


When you use acceptance and forgiveness, then you simply let go of those 
feelings of anger and frustration. You know that what has happened has 


happened and effectively let go of the temptation to dwell on the past. 


Chapter 15: Social Skills 


Finally, we have arrived at the last chapter of the book! Within this chapter, 
it is time to address several social skills that people have. As both CBT and 
emotional intelligence seek to help you become a well-rounded individual 
that is capable of handling nearly anything, it is important to stop and 
recognize the importance of some of the most basic social skills that you 


may need. 


When you master these social skills of mirroring, empathizing, making 
good eye contact, listening actively, and learning to analyze other people, 
you will find that your own abilities to be emotionally intelligent will 
increase dramatically. Effectively, you will be able to manage yourself and 
those around you. Imagine how much easier communicating with other 
people would be if you could understand their body language or if you 
acknowledged their own feelings at the moment? How much easier would it 
be to relate to people if you knew what to look for to know that they are 
interested in you? What if you are able to listen actively in order to better 


understand those around you? 


Mirroring 

The first technique that we will look at was drawn from neuro-linguistic 
programming but has become incredibly popular. This is the skill of 
mirroring—when you can mirror someone else, you are effectively able to 
make sure that you and the other person have a working connection with 
each other. Commonly used to make yourself more relatable or more 
persuasive, using mirroring allows you to actively relate to the other person 
through tapping into the other person’s unconscious mind in order to 


convince them to be willing to interact with you. 


When you are mirroring someone else, you are acting upon the idea that the 
closer two people are to each other, the more in-tune they are with each 
other. They typically mimic each other’s movements without even realizing 
it—they will actively follow the lead of each other in their conversations 
and even in their body language. If one crosses their arms, so will the other. 
If one takes a drink, the other one will, too. Effectively, then, you can tell 
how close people are in general by looking at how similarly and in sync 


they move. 


However, you can also trigger this in other people—you can effectively 
convince them to follow your lead in order to reap all of the benefits of 
them actively feeling like they can trust you. Think of when this could be 
useful—particularly if you want to be persuasive with emotional 
intelligence, you need to be able to prove that you are trustworthy. This is 


one such way to do so. 


To mirror other people, you will follow three key steps—you will make 
sure that you feel some sort of connection to the other person, you will 
match their pace somehow, and then you will identify their punctuator. In 
learning these, you will be able to convince even strangers that you hardly 
know that you and they are closer than either of you actually are. This is an 
incredibly important social skill—you can use it to facilitate a relationship 


that you feel is not properly developing quickly enough, for example. 


Make a Match the 
connection pace 


When you go to make a connection, you effectively want to figure out how 
best to present yourself in the situation to make yourself seem like you are 
actively listening. Of course, you will be actively listening, but you really 
want to emphasize it for the other person. You do this by facing the other 
person, making solid eye contact, and nodding your head as you listen. As 


you do this, you should feel the makings of the beginning of a relationship. 


You can continue through matching the pace of the other person—you 
effectively want to pick up on the other person’s enthusiasm and speech 
patterns. If they are speaking rapidly, you, too, should speak rapidly. If they 
are calm, you should approach the situation calmly as well. In doing this for 
a while, you should find that they also are matching your own speaking 


pace as well. 


Finally, you must figure out what the other party’s punctuator is—this is 
how they really emphasize what they are saying at any given moment. Most 


commonly, you see this in people who may punch the air or make a certain 


hand gesture, such as chopping on their palm when they really want to 
emphasize that point they are making. Upon identifying it, you must then 
figure out when they are going to use it next—and then beat them to it. You 
want to use the punctuator before they do in order to make sure that you 


actively are able to trigger that mirroring connection. 


From there, all you need to do is test if you were successful. If you were, 
you will find that they will unconsciously mirror your own subtle 


movements as well. 


Empathizing 

While empathizing does not come naturally to everyone, it is critical to 
know how to do it. Many people will find that they naturally empathize 
with others without trying to, but if you are not in that lucky group that 
learns to empathize without much effort, you may find that you need to 


make it a point to learn. 


Remember, empathy is critical to your own ability to relate to other people. 
If you cannot naturally empathize, you must figure out how to cognitively 
empathize so you can, at the very least, understand other people and their 


emotions as well. 


When you want to begin, you will start quite simply—imagine yourself in 
the other person’s shoes. If you are annoyed that your friend is irritated that 
you were late to something, perhaps you should consider how you would 
have felt if your friend had been late to meet you—you likely would have 


been annoyed. 


While that is a simple version of how to imagine yourself in the shoes of 
someone else, this is exactly what you will be doing. You are looking at the 
other person’s situation and trying to figure out how their situation would 
make you feel. You are going to want to consider as much as you can when 
you do this—where they grew up, what do they have available to them, and 
anything about them that is relevant to this situation. Are they annoyed 
because they feel like you have grown up too sheltered from consequences, 
perhaps? Or maybe because they feel like you, just like everyone else, do 


not respect them for some reason. 


With that idea of how they are feeling, you should then take a moment to 
investigate any of the underlying feelings that may be guiding the other 
person. Now that you recognize that your friend is annoyed at you for being 
late, for example, you are able to ask questions for further understanding to 


figure out why it mattered in the first place. 


In developing this understanding of what they feel and why you are able to 
begin empathizing with the other person. Over time, you may find that this 
process becomes quite automatic—you no longer have to think about it. 
That is a good thing and it is a sign that you are naturally becoming more 
emotionally intelligent. 


Making Good Eye Contact 


Making good eye contact with other people is a critical skill. When you can 
make good, healthy eye contact, you are effectively allowing yourself to 
acknowledge the other party. You are telling them that they matter to you 
simply because you are actively looking at them. 

Making good eye contact is actually surprisingly simple—when you need to 
make eye contact with someone else, you should follow the rule of making 
eye contact 50% of the time when you are speaking and 70% of the time 
when you are listening. This allows the other person to see that you are 
attentive and interested in them, while also reminding them to continue 


speaking to you. 


If you find that making active eye contact is too difficult for any reason at 
all, you may find that looking at the bridge of their nose fools them too. As 
far as the other person will be concerned, you will be making eye contact 
with them, and you are able to avoid it if you find that direct eye contact is 
uncomfortable or too much for you to manage. However, even the illusion 


of eye contact can go a long way. 


Active Listening 


Another crucial social skill, especially if you wish to be emotionally 
intelligent, is being able to listen actively. Too many people make the 
mistake of listening with the intent to reply to what is being said rather than 
to actively listen to what is being said. When you listen actively, you are 
effectively ensuring that the speaker feels acknowledged and like you truly 


care. 


If you wish to be emotionally intelligent, you are focused on trying to make 
that a priority. Effectively, then, you will be actively attempting to listen 
with the intent to understand. Doing so is not as difficult as it may seem. All 
you need to do is start by making eye contact as the other party speaks. As 
you listen, you should always be paying your undivided attention to the 
other party. No distractions should be allowed during this phase. Make sure 
that you are actively listening and nodding your head to show that you are 


listening. 


The most important part, however, is to remember that as you listen, you 
should be focused on listening only. There should be no attempts to come 
up with your own responses to the other party—you should simply be 


making it a point to hear and understand. 


When the other person finishes speaking, before you reply, you must try to 
recap what was said. In your own words, offer a brief summary of what you 
believe was said and then ask to make sure you got it right. If they agree, 


then you can take the time to figure out your reply. If they inform you that 


you are wrong, however, you must ask clarifying questions to make sure 


that you do get a solid understanding. 


Only after you have that understanding are you able to finally put together 


your reply to ensure that you have actively listened. 


Understanding Body Language 


Finally, one last skill that will not be instructed, but is strongly 
recommended that you check out is the ability to read and understand body 
language. Effectively, when you learn how to read the body language of 
other people, you are enabling yourself to better understand them. You are 
learning how best to understand those around you when you learn to read 
their nonverbal communication. If you wish to be emotionally intelligent 
and are ready to move on to skills beyond what has been included in the 
book thus far, moving on to analyzing people is probably the best place for 


you to go. 


Conclusion 


Congratulations! You have made it to the end of Emotional Intelligence & 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy! At this point, you have taken a look into 
both emotional intelligence and CBT, two methods of self-improvement 
that are readily actionable without requiring the instruction of a 
professional. Hopefully, your journey of reading through this book was 
informative and pleasing for you. Every effort was made to ensure that what 
you read was something that you could act upon, relate to, and readily 


understand. 


Perhaps the most important takeaway from this book, above all, is the fact 
that thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are intricately related to one another. 
Remember the fact that your thoughts will always influence your feelings, 
which will always influence your behaviors, and use that understanding to 
really push your own social interactions forward. You will not only be able 
to control yourself better in knowing these cycles, but you will also be able 
to predict other people’s behaviors as well, allowing you to begin to 
develop that propensity for relationship management that is so important 


within emotional intelligence. 


As you read through this book, you were guided through a solid 
understanding of what emotional intelligence is. You learned about the 
purpose of EQ, as well as the pillars that help build it, along with the 
primary skills within each pillar. From there, you took a look into cognitive 
behavioral therapy, another process that can help you learn to self-regulate, 


which in turn, makes it valuable to emotional intelligence. 


From here, you have plenty of options. You may decide that you wish to 
study more about emotional intelligence and CBT—both are valid options, 
as this book only scratched the beginning of both deep fields. You may 
decide that you want to learn more about empathy and how to wield it to 
become successful in social interactions. You may even decide to take the 
advice in the last chapter and focus solely on learning about how to read 
other people. Remember, being able to analyze body language consciously 
can be one of your biggest assets, especially if you are striving for 


emotional intelligence and excellence. 


No matter where you choose to go, however, what holds true is that you 
now have the skills and several techniques to help you handle many 
different self-regulation problems. There were several techniques that were 
provided for you to help you work through depression, anxiety, insomnia, 
and anger. These techniques may be incredibly valuable to you as you begin 


to practice them. 


Thank you so much for allowing me to join you on your journey to mental 
wellness. Whether you suffer from anxiety and depression or whether you 
have simply been looking for methods through which to better yourself, this 
book should have provided you with plenty of actionable advice that will 


aid you in all of your endeavors. 


No matter where you go from now, remember that the techniques of both 
emotional intelligence and cognitive behavioral therapy can be incredibly 
influential and incredibly beneficial to you as a person. As you master these 


skills, you will find that your own interactions with others will change. 


Finally, please feel free to leave a review on Amazon if you have found this 
book to be useful to you. It was designed to provide you with plenty of 
information in the most understandable way possible, and if you have found 
it to be useful, do not hesitate to hop on over to the Amazon page and let 
me know. Your valuable feedback is always greatly appreciated! Thank you 


and good luck on your journey. 


Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse 


Recovery 


A Guide to Understand Emotional 
Narcissism, Identify the Narcissist and 
Escape from Narcissistic Techniques. Use 


Empathy to Recover from Narcissistic Abuses 


Introduction 


Congratulations on purchasing Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse Recovery, 


and thank you for doing so. 


Have you ever had that feeling of dread when you look at the clock and 
realize that someone will be home soon? Maybe it was a parent, or perhaps 
it was a romantic partner. You know that they are on their way, and you 
immediately dread it. Instead of being at ease, you find yourself stressed out 
and on edge. You may find that you dread being around the other person, 
and any time you know that you will have to see him or her, you cannot 
help but feel your own anxiety spike, even if you have no reason that you 


can think of to be so uncomfortable. 


If you know that feeling of dread that comes when you face seeing someone 
that you know, you may be suffering from narcissistic or emotional abuse. 
Now, you may be thinking that the person that you are afraid of has never 
laid a hand on you, or that you cannot possibly think of a time during which 
the other person was abusive. However, not all abuse leaves a physical 
mark. In fact, some of the worst abuse that a person can endure never leaves 
a physical mark at all. It is possible that you have been suffering from 
emotional or narcissistic abuse without being aware of it. Your unconscious 
mind may recognize that what has been happening is not right or normal, 
causing you to feel afraid or anxious without reason. If you are not aware of 
the signs, it can be easy to miss them, and you may instead entirely 
overlook the true cause as being unnecessary anxiety that needs to be 
medicated or treated in some other way. However, this abuse is very real, 


and the effects of the abuse hurting other people are real as well. 


This book is your guide to identifying emotional and narcissistic abuse. You 
will be able to tell if you are, in fact, suffering from one of these invisible 
types of abuse, and if you are, you will be given the tools that you will need 
to handle it. You will be instructed on what to expect in abusive situations, 
how to recognize them, and how to heal from them, allowing you to reclaim 


your life once and for all. 


Remember, no one should feel like they have to live life in fear. Being in 
your home should not be a source of anxiety, nor should you ever have to 
feel like you must constantly interact with someone that makes you 
uncomfortable. When you read through this book, you will discover how to 
recognize several types of abuse, some of which you may have never 
realized were abusive in the first place. You will learn how to recognize and 
recover from emotional abuse. You will then be introduced to recognizing 
the narcissist—a particularly insidious personality type that usually leads to 
manipulative, coercive, and abusive treatment of those around them. You 
will learn how to recognize the narcissistic abuser, as well as the narcissist’s 
favorite tactics to abuse. You will learn how deeply the narcissist’s abuse 
can hit, even if you are not ever harmed physically. Finally, you will be 
introduced to the empath, a personality type that, due to the kind nature and 
desire to help others, usually ends up taken advantage of by manipulators 
and abusers everywhere. You will learn about the empath’s greatest strength 
—empathy, and how that power of empathy can help overcome the abuse 
that has been faced. 


As you read through this book, it is with the utmost hope that you will find 
it to be helpful, instructive, and provide you with an actionable advice that 


you can follow and use in order to protect yourself from abuse, or if you 


have already found yourself abused, it will point you in the right direction 
to healing. Keep in mind that you do not have to suffer through abuse, and 
if you ever feel like you are in active danger, please consult with your local 
domestic violence hotline to help you. You may have access to more 
resources than you realized to help you live the life you deserve: A life free 


from abuse. 


There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for 
choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much 


useful information as possible; please enjoy it! 


Chapter 1: Abuse in Relationships 


When people think of abuse, they typically think of the kind that leaves 
noticeable evidence behind—physical and sexual abuse. However, abuse 
comes in all shapes and sizes, with different effects and results. Would you 
consider being yelled at to shut up abuse? What about being called names 
while yelling? Throwing something at the wall? Punching a door? Not 
providing you with the access you need and deserve to familial funds? 
Threatening to take custody of your children? All of these are different 
forms of abuse, and not a single one of them ever involved laying a finger 
on the other person. 


Abuse is dangerous—not only can it cause serious physical or emotional 
harm, but it can also cause serious mental health issues, or even lead to 
death, substance abuse, or self-harm. Abuse is nothing to ever be ignored, 
and if you ever suspect that someone is being abused, reaching out to them 
in private can be the right thing to do. If you are the victim of abuse, you do 
not have to suffer any longer—you can take a stand and leave once and for 
all. It may be intimidating or seem entirely impossible to leave, especially if 
you are financially dependent upon the abuser, but you can make that call to 


leave if you choose to do so. 


What is Abuse? 


Consider for a moment the definition of the word “Abuse.” If you were to 
look up a definition online or in a dictionary, you would be provided with 
something along the lines of misuse of an item, or to treat with cruelty or 
violence. Abuse can be used to refer to the misuse of, for example, alcohol, 
during which the one drinking frequently drinks far too much, whether due 
to addiction or due to some other factor. Abuse of power can happen when a 
judge passes a judgment that is entirely designed to benefit the judge or 
push an agenda rather than making the right call. You may even hear people 
say that items are abused, such as saying that a child’s favorite toy has 
really stood up to a lot of abuse. This means that, despite rough usage, the 
toy has held up. 

Despite the wide range of how the word itself can be used, within the scope 
of this book, we will be focusing solely on the definition of abuse is 
relevant to the mistreatment or harm to others. More specifically, we are 
going to add one extra element when discussing abuse within this book—it 


must be intentional. 


Effectively, then, abuse will be defined for the duration of this book as the 
intentional act of harming another person for reasons other than self- 
defense. The only justifiable act of harming another person or animal is to 
either consume after humanely hunting or slaughtering or in self-defense 
during which you were not the aggressor. This means, then, that any time 
that someone hurts you intentionally, no matter how you were hurt, you 


have suffered abuse. 


Of course, abuse will vary in severity. You could be slapped on the bottom 


by some random stranger walking down the street, which would obviously 


be distressing, but not necessarily life-changing. You could also be forcibly 
held down and violently assaulted. Both are still abuse, and both are still 


wrong, but on the spectrum, there is a vast range of differences in severity. 


One thing still holds true—you deserve to live your life free of abuse. This 
is a message that you will see repeated throughout this book because it is so 


critical to hear. You deserve to be treated with kindness, not abused. 


Who is Abused? 


However, though you and those around you deserve to be treated with 
kindness, you are far from alone. Abuse runs rampant around the world. 
Especially in the United States, the statistics on abuse are extreme. It is 
believed that 1/3 of women and 1/5 of men have been abused either 
physically, sexually, or psychologically, at some point in their lives. This 
abuse happens to people of all ages. Babies and young children are common 
targets. 1/3 teens have reported already having experienced violence and 
abuse during their own relationships. 

Effectively, anyone can be the victim of abuse. Rich or poor, young or old, 
abuse can happen to anyone. In fact, every single minute, 24 people are 
raped, abused, or stalked by a domestic or intimate partner within the 
United States alone. 48% of adults within the US have found themselves on 


the receiving end of psychological abuse within their lifetimes 


If you are the victim of abuse, do not be afraid to reach out—you are truly 
not alone, and other people can relate to you and your struggles. Just 
because abuse is so rampant and prevalent does not mean that you need to 
take it without fighting back, nor should you simply accept it. You can 
choose to leave. You can choose to stand up for yourself. You can choose to 


escape. It is not always easy, but you can do it. 


Reasons for Abuse 


First and foremost, it is important to acknowledge that abuse is never 
justifiable. It is never acceptable to intentionally hurt someone else, no 
matter how angry they have made you, nor how much they refuse to obey. 
People are not designed to be puppets, and no matter the relationship that 
you have, you always have free will. You can choose when to be sexually 
intimate and when you do not want to. You can decide what you will eat 
and what you will refuse. You decide who you talk to and who you will 
avoid. No matter what you have done, even if you have been unfaithful or 
done something that your partner is disapproving of, you do not even 
deserve to be intentionally harmed. 


Ultimately, most abuse endured is because one person desires power—they 
want to be in control, and the best way to do that is to force the other person 
to submit. They may believe that they own their partner, or that they have 
some say in what their partners are allowed to do, especially in marriage. 
However, this could not be further from the truth—you can choose who you 


want to associate with if you so choose. 


Other times, abuse is endured because the abuser believes that his or her 
needs come first—they want to feel like their partner should always 
prioritize their needs and will use abusive tactics to make it happen. They 
will intentionally remove the idea of equality within the relationship, 
making it clear to the victim that the abuser is dominant and more 
important. In doing so, the victim often eventually internalizes that he or 


she must always make the other person happy. 


Effectively, then, abuse is a power play. It is done to assert control over the 
victim to ensure that the victim feels powerless. In feeling powerless, the 
victim believes that he or she has no choice but continue to endure the 
abuse without argument or question. This is part of the reason why so many 


victims refuse to leave—they feel like they cannot. 


Abuse on its own is learned—people are rarely just abusive without having 
ever been exposed to it before. It may have been learned during childhood 
when abusive tactics were used growing up, such as a son growing up 
around an abusive father and naturally behaving exactly the same way 
toward his own partners and children in adulthood. It could have been seen 
on television or other forms of media and slowly internalized over a 


lifetime of exposure that has normalized abusive tendencies. 


What does not cause abuse, however, is the victim, and if the abuser ever 
tells you that it is your own fault that he or she acts that way, then they are 
in denial or trying to convince you of something that is not true to keep you 
under their thumbs for longer. Drugs and alcohol also do not cause abuse— 


someone who is intoxicated may be abusive, but it is because those 


tendencies are already present. Stress does not cause abuse, either. Someone 


who is not abusive will not see abuse as an option at all. 


Types of Abuse 


Abuse of all kinds is traumatic, no matter who it was that was abusive to 
you. While people tend to have an easy time recognizing physical abuse 
thanks to the literal marks it can leave on someone else, people often 
struggle to recognize other types of abuse as well. Despite the fact that 
abuse is as rampant as it is, people do not tend to recognize most kinds, and 


this chapter aims to change that. 


Reading through this section can be incredibly valuable to you. As you do, 
you can become capable of identifying and recognizing several of the more 
insidious forms of abuse that can usually slip under the radar. For example, 
some people may strongly feel that it is impossible for a husband to 
sexually abuse a wife—that is not true. When you know about some of the 
more obscure or less apparent forms of abuse, you will be in a far better 
position to resist that abuse or recognize when it is time to exit the 


relationship. 


Remember, no matter how much that your abuser tells you that you are 


stuck, or that you have no choice but to submit, remember that there are 


options out there for you. All you need to do is reach out. You do not need 
to live with abuse, and you can make a plan to leave. There are people who 
work on domestic violence hotlines that are ready and willing to help you. 
They can help you find resources in your local area and help you come up 
with a plan to help, no matter where you are or what your situation is. You 


do not deserve to live with any form of abuse. 


Primarily, abuse comes in several forms. We will look in particular about 
six of these right now: Emotional, financial, physical, sexual, spiritual, and 
narcissistic. Each of these happen differently, but they all have the potential 
to be harmful. You can be hurt by every single one of these forms of abuse, 
and just because you are not being touched physically does not mean that 
your abuse is not that bad. Please do not downplay your abuse or try to 


compare it to the abuse endured by other people. 


Forms o 
abuse 


ye S a A 
Emotional abuse 


Emotional abuse, also commonly referred to as psychological, verbal, or 
mental abuse, is a form of abuse during which the abuser uses mind games 
and emotions in order to gain control. The abuser wants to be able to 
manipulate your emotions and your mind in order to make sure that you do 
not feel secure enough to escape or to make you feel like you are incapable 
of escaping. This form of abuse is particularly insidious because it never 


leaves physical marks on the victim and is next to impossible to prove. 


When you are the victim of emotional abuse, you feel entirely incapable. 
You feel like you are stuck, but also left doubting whether you are actually 
being abused or if you are simply too sensitive about the situation. 
Emotional abuse is real and is wrong, and even though it may not leave a 


mark on you, it will impact your emotional state severely. 


Financial abuse 


Financial abuse is exactly what it sounds like—keeping finances away from 
the victim or somehow exerting control over the victim. Especially in a 
marriage, both parties should have equal access to finances, as marriage is 
generally approached as a team. Unless agreed to prior to that point, if one 
partner suddenly commandeers all control of the finances or restricts access 


to the finances, there may be financial abuse occurring. 


During financial abuse, one party’s access to the funds or to making money 
is restricted or hurt. Because finances and access to money are necessary to 
survive, restricting access to these funds can make it impossible to get out 
of a negative, abusive relationship. Along those lines as well, it is next to 
impossible to find a home if credit is destroyed. By damaging financial 
security, the abuser makes it, so the victim is far more reliant on the abuser, 
meaning that the victim lacks power. It may also encompass one’s credit as 
well. This is effectively anything that threatens the financial wellbeing of 
the individual being discussed, whether that is racking up debt, destroying 
credit, restricting access to money, or even threatening the workplace of the 


victim. 


Physical abuse 


Physical abuse is perhaps the easiest of them all to identify. Physical abuse 
is particularly known for being painful. It is physical attempts to restrain, 
subdue, or abuse the victim. In general, if you are being threatened 
physically or put into a dangerous situation, you are physically abused. One 
such form of this that people may not realize is kicking the victim out of the 
car in a dangerous area or leaving him or her locked outside, particularly if 
it is hot or cold. People have a right to shelter and intentionally interfering 


with that, making you stay outside, which is a form of physical abuse. 


This is perhaps the most immediately threatening of the forms of abuse that 
you can suffer. If you feel that you are at risk for physical abuse, or if you 
have been hit, you do have rights and repercussions. Please reach out for 
help and do not tolerate any physical abuse at all. This abuse has a tendency 
to continually get worse and worse as time goes on, and it is believed that a 
staggering three women per day are killed by their intimate partners just 
within the US alone. This is a terrifying number and is all the more reason 


that the instant a relationship turns physical, it should be ended. 


Sexual abuse 


Sexual abuse is something that people think is cut-and-dry, but actually has 
some nuances to it. You may feel like you have not been sexually abused if 
you do not know that certain occurrences are actually considered abusive, 
but the effects are undeniable. Even if you were unaware that you were 
sexually abused, you might find that what you have endured may actually 
be classified in this manner. You do not have to be violently raped by a 


stranger for your abuse that you have endured to be considered sexual abuse 


or assault. In fact, you can be assaulted or abused sexually by a partner or 
even a spouse. Marriage is not a license for free, uncensored access to the 
other person’s body. Even being pestered for sexual intimacy is a form of 
sexual abuse—if anything other than your enthusiastic and consensual yes 
to sexual activity is pursued, you may find that your partner is attempting to 
intentionally coerce or browbeat you into giving in. Remember, even in 
marriage, you retain full rights to your body and you are under no 


obligation to engage in any sort of sexual contact that you wish to avoid. 


Spiritual abuse 


Spiritual abuse is another of those forms of abuse that is particularly tricky 
to identify, but once you know what it is, you are able to point it out a bit 
easier. This is any time that an abuser attacks a victim’s choice in religion. 
It can happen to people from any religious type, and anyone can suffer from 
it. It is done to directly attack one’s religion, which is oftentimes one of the 
most intimate, innermost parts of their own belief system. To attack their 
belief system is to truly attack the individual, and it can be incredibly 
distressing. It can happen during a relationship, especially in contexts such 
as one person intentionally berating the other’s religious choices or 
preventing the victim from being able to practice. Sometimes, the abuser 
may even use their own or your own religious texts to justify the abuse, 
pointing to lines that are being misconstrued, such as allowing the man to 


lead with the woman falling back and obeying at all costs. 


Narcissistic abuse 


Finally, the last form of abuse that is being discussed here is narcissistic 
abuse. Narcissistic abuse refers to any abuse that has occurred by a 
narcissist. This book will spend several chapters discussing the narcissist 


and narcissistic abuse as it progresses. 


In particular, narcissists are particularly insidious with their abuse. They 
tend to be abusive simply because they do not see any reason for them not 
to get their way. They have a distorted view of reality around them, and 
because of that, they tend to try to browbeat everything into fitting their 
own views on the world. This is quite problematic—when they are actively 
trying to make everything else conform to their delusions, they end up 


harming several people in the process. 


More specifically, however, the narcissists are masters at manipulation and 
abuse. They are skilled in making the abuse that they are dishing out seem 
like it must be the fault of the victim, and they will not acknowledge 
anything beyond that as being the truth. In fact, they are so certain about 
their own viewpoints, that they will claim that anyone else’s perception of 
the truth is false. For now, all that matters is that you know that narcissistic 
abuse exists in its own category and that it encompasses all types of abuse. 


We will delve into this topic in-depth later. 


Effects of Abuse 


When you have been the victim of abuse, you may find that you have begun 
to change. You may not be able to notice it at first, but eventually, you 
notice that you are no longer the person you used to be. In particular, you 
may find some of the following effects are present in your life. These are 
effectively your emotional injuries in response to the harm that you have 
endured. Remember, some abuse can happen without ever leaving a 
physical mark, but the emotional scars that are there remain potentially for a 
lifetime. Some of these effects are: 


e Anxiety (including post-traumatic stress disorder): When you 
have been the victim of abuse, you are likely constantly living in 
a state of hyper-vigilance. You are afraid of what is going to 
happen if you remain in the relationship, but you are afraid of 
what will happen when you leave as well. Post-traumatic stress 
disorder is also a common anxiety disorder that many abuse 
victims suffer from, and this will be discussed in depth in Chapter 
7: The Effects of Narcissistic Abuse. 


e Depression: When you are constantly afraid for your life or sense 
of self, it becomes incredibly common to suffer from depression 
as well as you lose your ability to enjoy life. You may struggle to 
actively enjoy what is happening around you or feel like you 
cannot get out of bed. You may suffer from a lack of energy and 
lack of motivation to take care of yourself, your responsibilities, 
and your home. 


Risky behaviors: When you have been abused, you may find that 
you spend more time than usual acting out. You may, for 
example, speed or drive without a seatbelt. You may engage in 
risky, unprotected sex with others. You may use or abuse drugs. 
Ultimately, you do not care about what will happen to you, so you 
do not take the necessary precautions that would be used to keep 


you safe. 


Substance abuse: You may even decide to self-medicate through 
drugs and alcohol, or find that your abusive partner encourages 
you to feed your addiction. You find that drugs or alcohol serve as 
a sort of release and escape from the abuse and this can very 
quickly spiral into abuse of the substance, and potentially even 


addiction or overdoes if you are not careful. 


Self-harm or thoughts of suicide: Another common coping 
mechanism is self-harm. You may intentionally hurt yourself to 
provide some feelings of control over the situation that you have 
found yourself in. While unhealthy, you feel like you are able to 
control when you hurt, and that can make you feel like you have 
reclaimed some power. If you are having thoughts of self-harm or 
suicide, it is important that you reach out to a licensed medical 
professional, as this is considered a medical emergency and you 
will be able to get the help that you need. 


Low self-esteem: When you are constantly being told that you 
are undeserving or unworthy, you will eventually internalize it 
and believe that it is true. This does not mean that you are weak 
or make it true—it just means that you have heard it so often that 


you believe it. However, lacking self-esteem can then mean that 


you do not trust yourself and that you doubt your ability to get 


yourself out of the relationship. 


Avoidance of relationships or other triggers: If you have been 
abused in the past, you may choose to avoid relationships 
altogether. Especially if you have suffered on more than one 
occasion, you may just feel like it is simpler to avoid the 


relationships altogether than it is to try to find a healthy one. 


The Cycle of Abuse 


Before we address the rest of this book, there is one important concept that 
must be remembered—abuse exists in a cycle. Not only is this cycle 
generational, meaning that children who grew up in an abusive environment 
grow up to create abusive environments themselves, but also in the sense 
that abuse within a single relationship tends to occur within a very specific, 
predictable cycle during which things are sometimes comfortable and 
happy, but other times, abuse is highly prevalent. People often take those 
honeymoon periods, the periods during which the abuse is absent, as signs 
that the relationship is worth salvaging, but consider this for a moment: If 
the relationship were only abusive all of the time, would anyone want to 
stay? No one would want to put up with nonstop abuse—there has to be 
some sort of good there as well to keep the individual interested in staying 


and motivated to continue to return to the relationship. 


The cycle of abuse occurs in four distinct stages: Tensions building, an 


incident, reconciliation, and the calm. 


Building 


Stage 4: The Stage 2: The 


Calm Incident 


During the first stage of tensions building, there is a tension present in the 
relationship. You may feel like communication is breaking down or that you 
and your partner are simply constantly annoying each other. The victim 
may feel like they are heading toward another incident of abuse and try 
anything to try to please and placate the abuser in hopes of avoiding it. 
Communication will continue to degrade, and there may be frequent 


arguments or disagreements during this period. 


The second stage, known as the incident stage, is when the abuse happens. 
Usually, there is a big blowout—it may be physical abuse, or it may be an 
argument or an attempt to control or coerce the victim. The abuser may yell, 
call names, threaten to leave, intimidate, attempt to force sexual intimacy, 
or attempt other forms of violence or abuse. This is the big, scary event that 


the victim was trying to avoid. 


After the incident, the abuser realizes that the abuse has occurred and 
moves into damage control. In particular, he will aim for reconciliation, 
which refers to the name of this stage. They will often apologize, but that 
apology is generally insincere and meant to simply placate the victim. The 
victim is oftentimes blamed at this time, or the abuser will deny that abuse 
has happened at all. It may also be downplayed in order to convince the 
victim that things are not as bad as the victim may see them. Also common 
at this stage is an apology with a promise to do better, seek counseling, or 
work somehow on the relationship. However, these efforts to better the 


relationship rarely, if ever, actually occur. 


Finally, after reconciliation is complete comes the calm in the storm—this 
is the brief respite during which the victim is reminded of all of the reasons 
he or she fell in love or was pulled into the relationship in the first place. 
This is the stage known as the honeymoon period. During this time, the 
relationship seems fine—the abuse is forgotten or forgiven, and the abuser 
is often found showering the victim with affection and gifts. During this 
period, the victim is reminded of why he or she wants to remain in the 


relationship. 


The Challenges of Escaping Abuse 


At this point, after reading through the struggles that so many people face in 
abusive relationships, you may have a single question going through your 
mind—why do they not just leave? After all, it would be as simple as just 
walking out the door and not returning, right? 


While it is always a possibility to leave, there is a lot more to unpack with 
that. It is a complicated issue—yes, leaving is the right move when you are 
in an abusive relationship, but there are often outside factors beyond the 
fact that abuse is present that needs to be considered. Remember, abuse is 
about exerting power and control, and when you try to leave an abuser, you 
are directly taking back that power. Thus far, in that relationship, the abuser 
has used abuse to retain that power, and leaving will not change that. 
Oftentimes, leaving is the most dangerous time in an abusive relationship— 
the abuser is likely to retaliate and make leaving as difficult and painful as 


possible to force the victim into submission. 


Beyond the danger of leaving, there may be several other factors that come 
into play within that particular relationship, such as struggling to leave 


because children are involved. When children are present in the 


relationship, leaving is no longer as simple as packing up and disappearing, 
especially if the children are shared. The abusive parent still has rights to 
the children that cannot simply be revoked without court permission, and 
that revocation rarely happens. Victims may instead choose to stay in the 
relationship, so they have access to their children instead of having to share 


their children with the abusive parent for long stretches of time. 


Another common challenge and roadblock that people hit is that of their 
culture or religion. Many cultures and religions reject the idea of divorce 
or separation, and others still expect subservience of women to the men. 
When you are told that you must be obedient to your husband and that your 
husband is in the right to hit or hurt you, you are going to feel like you 
cannot leave. You are going to be so caught up in what is right by your 
culture and in your relationship that escaping becomes incredibly frowned 
upon. If you know that you cannot divorce in the eyes of your religion, or 
that you risk your culture rejecting you for giving up on your relationship, 
you may find that you are happier keeping your current community, even if 


that means tolerating the abuse. 


Some people simply do not have the physical capacity to leave due to an 
illness or disability They may not be mobile enough to live on their own, or 
they may require help for basic day-to-day survival, and they feel like their 
best chance is staying in the relationship and dealing with the abuse. They 
may even have significant health issues that prevent them from being able 
to take care of their children, so instead of leaving the relationship, they 


stay to continue to live with their children in an effort to protect them. 


Other people may find that they are too embarrassed to reach out for help 


because of the stigmas surrounding abuse. If you have been the victim of 


abuse, it can be difficult to reach out to others. Especially if your partner 
has spent the relationship telling you that everything is your own fault, you 
may feel like you will be harshly judged for your own victimization, despite 


the fact that the victim is never deserving of abuse. 


Sometimes, fear holds the individual back. Perhaps your partner has 
threatened suicide or to hurt you if you leave, or you worry about how you 
will be able to support yourself and your children without another person 
helping to pay for household necessities. You may be afraid that your 
abuser will not go without a fight and that the abuse will escalate if you 
attempt to leave. In particular with regards to fear, in many cases, 
immigration status can also play a significant role as well if the victim is 
not documented within the country, they oftentimes feel like they have to 
put up with it, as if they go to court, or if the victim reaches out for help, the 
victim will simply be deported. Especially if the individual has children that 
are citizens of the country that the victim is undocumented within, the 


victim may remain silent in order to avoid being deported and separated. 


A significant lack of resources can also leave someone suffering from 
abuse of any kind feeling entirely trapped in a bad situation, and the abusers 
know this. This is exactly why they will take advantage of financial abuse 
to make leaving harder. You may not have the money to pay for a home for 
yourself and your children. You may not have a car to drive away in. You 
may not have access to the finances in the family, and even if you are 
actively contributing to them, you may not have access. If you simply do 
not have the resources, you may be afraid to try, especially if you are 


pregnant or have children. 


Sometimes simply not having support from friends or family can make 
you feel trapped and alone. Without access to other people to talk to, you 


may find that you cannot discuss what is happening, nor do you have 


anyone to reach out to when things get bad. Without a sort of sounding 
board in someone else, you may find that you do not see the relationship as 
being as bad as you may initially think, especially if it has been a slow 
escalation up to that point. Alternatively, you may find that your friends and 
family members do not see the abuse that you are enduring, and they often 


try to downplay it or ask if it is truly as bad as you are saying. 


Of course, one of the most compelling reasons that people find to stay in 
their relationships despite the abuse is love. They truly love their partners, 
and that is enough to make sure that they are staying in their relationships 
that they otherwise would have left. Other times, what can hold you back is 
love. After all, if you did not love your abuser, you would likely not be 
willing to put up with the abuse at all. When you love your partner, you 
may hold onto hope that the abuser will change, as promised, and you will 
give chance after chance, hoping that you can get the person that you have 


fallen in love with back. 


One final reason that you may find that people are likely to stay behind is 
that the relationship and the abuse has been normalized. This means that it 
seems entirely normal to you instead of as something that may be a huge 
red flag. Think of how, in some cultures, it may be entirely fine to make eye 
contact and smile, but in others, eye contact is seen as disrespectful and 
rude—eye contact is not normalized in those countries and cultures. If you 
have grown up around abuse and it has simply become normalized, you will 
not see the problem. If you grew up in a household where the parents 
regularly yelled at each other, you might feel like yelling is entirely normal 
when mad. You feel like these unhealthy coping mechanisms are nothing 
but passionate expressions of feelings and do not acknowledge the abuse 


because you do not recognize it. 


Chapter 2: Recognizing 
Emotional Abuse 


For the next several chapters, we will be specifically addressing emotional 
abuse. You now know what it is, at least on the surface—you know that 
emotional abuse is a form of psychological control and just how dangerous 
it may be. However, do you know how to recognize it? Do you know how 
to label several of the most common abuse tactics? This particular form of 
abuse tends to be incredibly covert—it is designed to be hidden in plain 


sight, and in reading this chapter, you will learn how to identify it. 


If you can stop and think of a time during which you felt like you were not 
good enough, like your partner was doing you a huge favor by staying with 
you, it may be time to reevaluate your relationship. If you have ever come 
to the realization that the voice that you were using to talk about yourself as 
the voice of someone else instead of your own, you may have suffered from 


emotional abuse at some point. 


Emotional abuse is commonly referred to as verbal or psychological abuse, 
and it is designed to make you feel bad about yourself. It is meant to make 
you feel like you are not worthy, that you are not deserving of respect, and 
that you are not in control. The whole purpose of emotional abuse is that 
dominance over the victim, designed to grant the abuser free reign over the 
individual. The more emotional abuse one has endured, most often, the 
more subservient they become. They stop trying to fight back and slowly do 


begin to believe that they were deserving of the abuse. 


This chapter will guide you through learning to recognize the signs of 
abuse. You will learn how to identify the most common behaviors exhibited 
by the abuse victims, as well as the long-term effects of suffering from 
emotional abuse. From there, you will be guided through several common 
and favored emotional abuse tactics designed to keep the victim on edge, 


out of control, and subservient. 


Signs of Emotional Abuse within the Relationship 


It can be difficult to spot an abusive relationship, especially if you are in the 
outside looking in. However, an emotionally abusive relationship typically 
looks drastically different from a healthy one, and if you are able to spend 
enough time around someone in an emotionally abusive relationship, you 
may find that you are able to identify several of these signs on a regular 
basis. Take the time to familiarize yourself with these common signs of 


emotional abuse within a relationship. 


If you notice that a friend or family member has a relationship with several 
of these signs, you may want to consider reaching out to ensure that 
everything is okay and offer your own support if it is needed. These signs 
can be incredibly stressful for both the one suffering from the abuse and the 


one who may be witnessing such abhorrent behaviors. 


If you have felt like a relationship that you have been exposed to seems like 
it is not quite right, it may be that it is manipulative and abusive in nature. 
In these instances, many people feel like turning away is the right thing to 
do, but if you see someone struggling in a relationship with several red 
flags, such as the ones that will be discussed in a moment, the kind thing to 


do is reach out. 


Identifying an emotionally abusive relationship can be quite concerning and 
nerve-wracking, especially if it is your relationship or the relationship of a 
loved one. However, if you can identify it, you can help the other person 
escape. You can offer your support. You can understand that the behaviors 
of isolation and avoidance are probably not coming from the victim but 


rather forced by the abuser. 


Generally, identifying an abusive partner of one of your friends or family 
members can be quite obvious—while the victim may be unwilling to admit 
it, everyone knows when they are having to walk on eggshells. However, 
oftentimes, when people have to deal with their friends or family members 
being abused, they feel like they must choose between either begrudgingly 
tolerating the abuser, despite being incredibly concerned about the behavior 
out of fear of being cut off if they do not, or they do say something, only to 
have the abuser freeze them out. After all, the only way that you can truly 
help someone get out of an abusive relationship is if they truly want to 
escape it. If they are not interested in that escape, you are not going to be 
able to do much other than offer support until that time during which they 


do decide to leave. 


Now, imagine that your best friend, Cara, has a boyfriend named Austin. 
Cara is the sweetest young woman that you know—she was never 
particularly self-confident, but she was so kind that no one was bothered by 
the lack of self-esteem. They simply gently reminded her that she was a 


well-loved member of the social group and always happily invited her over. 


Seemingly out of nowhere, Cara met him—Austin was a man a few years 
older than her, but she did not mind. She was happy because he showered 
her with lavish attention and love. He was always wanting to spend time 
with her, sending constant messages to her and checking in on her. If she 
did not answer a text message within five minutes of it being sent, however, 
he would call her, and whatever he was saying was leaving Cara visibly 


distressed. When she would get off of the phone, she would apologize and 


leave, saying that he was demanding that she get home, or he would not be 
there later that night. 


Over time, as Austin grew more and more comfortable, you and your 
friends noticed several red flags in the relationship. You saw how he would 
yell at Cara on a regular basis, both in public and out of public scrutiny. She 
would recount times during which he would scream and berate her to her 
face at home, and when you tried to point out that she did not deserve it, she 
simply shrugged and said that she deserved it because she was not 


particularly smart and she was lucky to have him. 


Soon, it seemed like even your social nights grew affected by the presence 
of Austin—he would not allow Cara to go to those hangout sessions any 
longer simply because he could not be there as well. In fact, she slowly was 
only allowed to go to places that he was present at as well, claiming that she 
was promiscuous and would be cheating on him if she were left to her own 
devices. You noticed that when he was around, he seemed to have 
knowledge of private conversations, and it became clear that he was 
monitoring her text messages. Soon, her social media accounts disappeared 
altogether. 


Over time, you noticed that Cara was becoming more stressed out. She 
seemed to withdraw from the group more and more, until one day, she 
broke down and told you that he had been threatening to kill himself if she 
left him, and though she wanted to leave so badly, she felt like she had no 
choice but to stay. She described the look of absolute, unadulterated fury in 
his eyes when she said that she wanted space and told you that she was 


certain he was going to seriously injure her. It was only when she shook off 


her interest in leaving as a joke and that she wanted to see how much he 


loved her that he seemed to settle down. 


Stop and see what problems you can identify within that short passage 
about your friend Cara and Austin. What was Austin doing that was 
problematic? Which behaviors would need to be entirely cut for the 
relationship to retain any sort of semblance of healthiness? Would it be 
possible for that to become a healthy relationship at all with how far it had 


flown into an abusive relationship? 


If you took the time, you may have noticed at least six distinctive red flags 
about Austin’s behavior that would be considered abusive. He spent a 
significant time yelling at her, for one. He would intimidate everyone with 
how loudly his voice would carry, and it constantly kept Cara down. The 
yelling was constantly joined by insults and berating that were so extreme 


that Cara herself was convinced that she must deserve it. 


There was no sense of privacy within the relationship, and it seemed like 
Austin was fully convinced that Cara needed some sort of chaperone to be 
able to involve herself in any group activities. You knew that she was not 
the kind of girl to ever fall for infidelity, but he was convinced that she was. 
She had to check in on a regular basis—yet another red flag, and eventually, 
she was required to take him anywhere that she wanted to go to make sure 


that she was not getting caught up in any funny business. 


Yelling and verbal abuse 
(berating, name calling, etc.) 


ack of prive in the 


relationship 


tant 


mi 


on require 


out 


Abuser must go every 


Defending 


Identifying Emotional Abuse Toward Yourself 


Now that you are becoming confident in recognizing an emotionally 
abusive relationship for other people, you may be wondering whether your 
own relationship is emotionally abusive. You may already know the answer 
to this or knew that it was abusive before reading this book, or you may 
suspect that it is abusive, and if this is the case, you may want to pay close 


attention to these signs. 


Let’s take some time to delve into Cara’s perspective on her abusive 
relationship in order to really see the victim’s perspective. These signs that 
are coming up are all huge red flags that Cara should have acknowledged, 
but she was far too afraid to. She may have been blinded by her love for her 
partner, or she may simply have been caught up in the idea of how great it 
would be to be in a relationship, and she was willing to put up with the 


beginning of the abuse. 


Ultimately, the only way that you can really identify emotional abuse will 
be through looking to find how you are feeling at any given point. You must 
be able to recognize your own emotions, developing that self-awareness of 
your own current states. There are several patterns for how the victims of 
emotional abuse usually feel, and while the victim may acknowledge that 
he or she is unhappy, it can be difficult to really articulate how they feel if 


they do not know how to convey it. 


Reading this section through Cara’s perspective is an attempt to remedy 
that. We will look at how Cara has been feeling, self-reflecting on whether 


she is in an abusive relationship. From the outside looking in, you may 


already be confident that she is being abused—because she is. However, it 


is much harder from the victim’s side to identify this. 


Firstly, Cara realizes that she is not happy. She knows that, but she is 
struggling to identify exactly how she is not happy or why she is miserable. 
She has a general understanding that the behaviors she has been exposed to 
are problematic, but she does not quite know how to articulate it. She is not 
sure if she is just overreacting or acting like things are far worse than they 
actually are—and then she realizes it. She feels like she cannot trust 
herself. 


A favorite tactic of the emotional abuser is called gaslighting—it will be 
discussed in greater depth later, but for all intents and purposes, it is meant 
to make you feel like you cannot trust your own perceptions of reality. It is 
designed to make you feel like you are always wrong about how you see the 
world, or that you are always overreacting, when in fact, you may be right. 
This is because you will likely rely on your partner if you feel like your 


Own perceptions are wrong, and the abuser is counting on this. 


This is exactly what happened with Austin—she constantly felt like her 
own emotions were wrong. She internalized the abuse and blamed it on 
herself because she was parroting what he had to say, not what she truly 
believed about herself. This is incredibly powerful to acknowledge—it 
means that she understands the root of her problem. She has lost trust in 
herself. 


In losing trust in herself, she feels like she is out of control, and for good 


reason. She has no real control over her life, what she does, or where she 


goes. She is constantly told what she can do and why she cannot go see 
other people. She has found that she has fallen into compliance simply 
because it was better than dealing with the alternative—his threats of 


suicide and his anger outbursts that would leave her afraid of her partner. 


Being afraid of him is yet another problem. After all, you should never feel 
like you have to be afraid of your partner or what he will do. If you feel like 
you are afraid of your partner, you may need to reevaluate and figure out 
what is going on to make you feel afraid. You may find the answer 
relatively simply, or you may realize that it is an unconscious sign that you 
should be more careful or distrustful of your partner. Unfortunately, Cara 


had spent so long listening to her fears that she was struggling to escape. 


His threats of suicide left her feeling three different ways: she was afraid to 
care for herself because trying to do so constantly angered him. In his 
mind, she was meant to shower him with what he wanted, and her needs 
were entirely meaningless. She was constantly feeling guilty due to his own 
manipulative techniques. Though she could never quite articulate it, she 
always found herself feeling guilty for everything. It really beat down her 
sense of self-esteem, and she struggled to come back from it. Finally, 
between wanting to avoid the fear and the guilt, she found herself preferring 
to walk on eggshells around her partner. She was happier just keeping 
him happy and complying with whatever was asked of her because 
compliance meant that she did not have to worry about him being angry or 


having an outburst. It was easy to just placate him and keep him happy. 


Further analysis and self-reflection would help Cara realize two more 


important aspects of her life that were major red flags: She constantly 


apologized, even when whatever happened had nothing to do with her. 
Despite the fact that she was not at fault, it was easier to apologize in an 
attempt to placate an unfortunate side effect of walking on eggshells on a 


regular basis. 


She found that, despite loving Austin with all her heart, she no longer 
craved intimacy with him. This is a massive red flag—people who love 
each other typically want to be intimate. They do this to get as close as 
possible to each other and do so from a position of trust and love. However, 
when you no longer feel safe or trust your relationship, you instead find that 
you are constantly panicking instead. People need to feel safe to be 
interested in intimacy, and people being abused rarely feel that safety 


necessary. 


Amidst this all, however, perhaps the most confusing thing of all for Cara 
was that she felt an intense need to protect the abuser. She felt like she 
would have to rationalize away his behaviors and tell everyone around her 
that he was not so bad because she loves him. She wanted to be able to 


protect him precisely because she does love him. 


These are all incredibly common realizations that guide people from 
realizing that they are, in fact, in an emotionally abusive relationship. They 
realize that their own lives have become so relatable to the account of our 
fictional friend, Cara, that they are shocked. They may realize just how 
dangerous the relationship actually is, and in realizing that, they can begin 


the process of healing as they continue to progress. 


Effects of Emotional Abuse 


Emotional abuse has all sorts of negative effects that last far longer than the 
relationship. You may find that you carry these signs with you well after 
having ended the relationship, and in some cases, they will not go away 
without any attempts to get therapy or seek some other way to treat it. 
These are effectively the scars of your abuse—you may not have ever 
received any physical ones, but the emotional ones are just as real and just 


as enduring. 


A Damaged Sense of Self 


If you have survived an emotionally abusive relationship, there is a good 
chance that you have had your own self-esteem damaged in some way. The 
emotional abuser’s tactic is to make you feel like you are not good enough, 
and they are frequently quite good at this. The end result is that you 
frequently see yourself as damaged or not particularly valuable, and you 


may not even realize that you do this. 


You may put your needs last or simply ignore your needs altogether. You 
may find that you regularly tell yourself that you cannot do what you want 
to. You may self-sabotage or procrastinate because you do not feel like you 


are capable. 


Alexithymia (an inability to identify emotions) 


This is a fancy word for an inability to accurately identify or feel your own 


emotions. Effectively, you become impervious to your emotions and instead 


live a life of numbness. You may have emotions, but you are entirely 
unaware that they are happening. Even though your body language will 
show your emotion, if someone asks you, you will deny it, saying that you 
do not actually feel that emotion. After so long of being emotionally abused 


and feeling your emotions, you have sort of disconnected from them. 


Depression 


Depression is a common long-term effect of living in an emotionally 
abusive relationship simply due to the fact that you are not going to find 
that you are enjoying life and what you are doing if it is constantly 
shadowed by the abuse. Even after escaping, you may feel like you cannot 
find enjoyment. This may present itself as a sort of hopelessness in your life 
like things can never get better, or that you will always be miserable in your 
life. 


Struggling to Concentrate 

Another common effect of prolonged emotional abuse is the inability to 
concentrate well. This is often a side effect of depression and anxiety—you 
are too busy worrying about other things to actually concentrate on what is 
in front of you. 


Struggling to Sleep, or Sleeping too Much 


Commonly associated with depression, emotional abuse can leave you 


feeling too on edge to sleep at all, leading to insomnia, or it can lead to you 


sleeping more than you should be as a form of escapism to avoid facing 


reality. 


Anxiety 


A common side effect of living life feeling like everything that you do is 
being scrutinized is anxiety. When you have walked on eggshells for so 
long, your body naturally transitions to being in a default state of arousal 
and anxiety. This means that you are far more likely to suffer from it, even 


after escaping the situation. 


Chronic Pain 


A life lived with anxiety and depression often causes all sorts of physical 
problems as well, and you may find that you very quickly end up living 
with chronic pain. Even after going to doctors and getting testing, you find 
that there is no particular reason for the pain that you are feeling and it gets 


lumped in with your depression and anxiety. 


Emotional Abuse Tactics 


Emotional abusers have all sorts of tactics that they like to pull from to keep 
their victims firmly under their thumbs. These tactics can seem like they are 
not anything at all, such as finding ways to make disparaging comments 
under the guise of a joke, or they can be truly harmful, such as directly 
telling someone to hurt or kill themselves. These different forms of 
emotional abuse are all dangerous in their own ways, and you should be on 


the lookout for them whenever possible. 


Gaslighting 


Gaslighting is particularly insidious as a form of emotional abuse. It is 
designed to make you feel like you cannot trust yourself, making you feel 
like you are unstable, untrustworthy, and like you are going crazy. It is one 
of those techniques that usually takes plenty of time to set up, but once it is 


set up, you feel like you cannot escape it. 


When someone gaslights you, they deny that what you are saying is true. 
They may start out by telling you that you were wrong about something 
little or unimportant, such as saying that you are misremembering some 
small, insignificant detail about something. Over time, the details become 
more significant, and the abuser eventually denies the thing that happens 
right in front of you, and you feel like you have to believe them. Especially 
because at that point, there is a perceived pattern of always getting things 
wrong and feeling like you cannot possibly know what you are talking 
about, you simply take what your partner says at face value. Because you 
inherently trust your partner, you do not think that he or she would be trying 


to intentionally lie to you. 


Emotional Manipulation 


Emotional manipulation is the act of making you feel a certain emotion 
deliberately in order to get you to act accordingly. If they want you to do 
something for them, they will find some way to make you feel an emotion 
that is conducive to their desired response, and they then get their way. For 
example, if your partner does not like your sister, your partner may make it 
a point to tell you that your sister did something unforgivable to get you 
angry. With your anger, you then pick a fight with your sister to defend your 
partner, and you end up severing ties. Did that event that your partner said 
ever happen? Probably not, or at least, not the way that your partner made it 
sound, but your partner did get you to end the relationship without him 


having to be the one telling you that he wants you to. 


FOG 


FOG stands for Fear, Obligation, Guilt. It is a common form of emotional 
manipulation that keeps you feeling one of those three emotions to keep 
you under control. Unlike general emotional manipulation, however, when 
you are kept under FOG, your partner is doing something to maintain it. 
Your partner must have something held over you to make you feel obligated 
so that he or she can make you feel guilty in order to get the desired 
response from you. Because this is a bit more intensive, it is typically 
reserved for relationships like parents to children, simply because it is easy 
to lord over someone else that you birthed and raised them. However, a 
romantic partner or friend may not have something similar to hold over 


their victim’s head. 


Character Assassination 


Character assassination is the art of making you feel like you are a flawed 
individual in order to keep power over you. It may involve making it a point 
to control you via means such as telling you that you are always so difficult 
or that you never get anything right. It could involve telling you that you are 
worthless or useless. It could involve telling lies about you to other people 
as well. Ultimately, character assassination is done to make you seem less 
competent or less well-liked. Especially if you are ending the relationship 
with the abuser, you may find that he or she will tell everyone around you 
that you are irrational, on drugs, or otherwise doing something that is 


incredibly frowned upon. 


Chapter 3: Fighting Emotional Abuse 


Emotional abuse is terrifying. No one wants to feel like they are less than 
significant or that they need to constantly walk on eggshells. If you are 
being emotionally abused, you may find that you are longing for the days of 
being happy, if you had ever felt that way in the past. You may have found 
that the abuse is terrifying. You may feel broken, beaten, or hopeless. It may 


seem like escape is impossible and that this will be your life forever. 
Remember, there is hope out there for you. 


It may take you time and effort to get out, but you can do it. You must 
remember that you will be playing the long game and acknowledge that the 
hard work will be worth it when you are finally living a life that you enjoy. 
You can attain that happiness that you deserve, and most of the time, you 
can cut off contact with your abuser in some way. Unless you share minor 
children, upon splitting ties or divorcing from the abuser, you have no 
reason to remain in contact. Yes, even if that relationship is with a parent, 
your own adult child, or another family member, you can break free and 


leave the relationship for good. 


However, that will take time. This chapter seeks to get you stabilized before 
you are able to begin getting out. Think of this chapter as your sort of safety 
floatation device—it is your first line of defense against drowning in the 
ocean of abuse you have been stranded in for so long. Hold on just a little 


bit longer, and you will find safety. 


Within this chapter, you will be provided with nine distinct methods that 
you can use to cope with your abuse in the moment. It is oftentimes 
impossible to simply up and leave for many people, and that is exactly why 
this chapter sets out to make sure that you are able to cope with the abuse 
before you can escape. It will be a process, but using these methods will 
help you find some sort of solace in the midst of the abuse. You will be 
actively protecting yourself, your psyche, and your future by planning to 


leave and using these methods. 


Keep in mind that these methods are specifically meant to combat 
emotional abuse. If you are suffering from physical abuse, you absolutely 
need to get out as soon as possible, and you can usually do so with the help 
of local law enforcement. If there is physical abuse, you should be able to 
file for a restraining order at your local courthouse or press charges at your 
local police station. Physical abuse can very quickly go downhill, so it is 
important that it is immediately met with an escape and any and all legal 


help that you can attain. 


When you are fighting emotional abuse, there is not typically a threat to 
your life or physical health, and these techniques will help you retain your 
emotional health. Emotional abuse requires you to react to it, so if you 
refuse to engage, distance yourself from the abuse, and have your own 
methods to sort of combat it as you get all of your legal ducks in a row, you 
can usually avoid the brunt of it. If you know that your partner is abusive 
emotionally and is telling you that you are useless from a point of wanting 
to manipulate you, you may be able to remind yourself that this is just your 
abuser being an abuser and that it is not true, or you can point out the ways 


that you are not worthless for yourself to acknowledge. 


Now, without further ado, let’s begin to address several ways that you can 
use to protect yourself. In arming yourself against the abuse, you may find 


that it stops being as distressing as it occurs, though it still may bother you. 


Identifying and Acknowledging 


The most powerful thing you can do is name the abuse for what it is. This 
means that you need to be able to acknowledge what it is and recognize it 
for what it is. In labeling the abuse what it is, you are able to distance 
yourself from it. It is no longer a matter of you causing problems or not 
being good enough—now your problem is that you are in a relationship 
with someone who is abusive. However, that has a relatively simple 
solution: Leaving. While leaving itself can oftentimes be quite messy and 
involve its own slew of steps to complete, especially if you are married or 
have children, being able to acknowledge that the problem is not you, after 


all, can be incredibly freeing. 


In acknowledging that you are not the problem or that you are not flawed, 
you are able to remove the blame from yourself. You are no longer at fault 
for the pain that you have suffered, and you are able to accurately point that 
blame firmly where it belongs—with the abuser. Think about the 
implications about that and the relief that many people would feel in 
acknowledging that they are not actually useless, unlovable, or whatever 


else the abuser has tried to convince them. 


With the blame removed, you may find that you are able to actually find 
some newfound confidence in yourself—if you are not the problem, then 
you have no need to fix yourself at that moment. What you need to do is 
leave the problem because you are not responsible for anyone else. No 
matter how well-intentioned you may be, you cannot change other people in 


any way. You cannot convince your abuser to be the loving person that you 


thought he or she was—all you can do is know when it is appropriate to exit 


the relationship altogether. 


Preparing to Leave 


As soon as you have acknowledged the abuse in your relationship, it is time 
to make your long-term plans. What are your end goals? What do you hope 
to accomplish? What do you want to do with yourself? There is a whole 
wide world out there away from your abuser, and the world is your oyster. 
You can do whatever you want without worrying about what the abuser 


thinks and whether the abuser would agree or ridicule your decisions. 


Setting that goal for yourself, that long-term picture of success, can help 
yourself to stay motivated. In moments of weakness, and there will be 
moments of weakness during which you consider that things would be 
better if you forgave and forgot, you can remember this goal—this picture 
of what you want in life. That can be the guiding light that keeps you on 


track. 


Leaving the relationship is going to be the most dangerous part for you, and 
for this reason, it is going to require meticulous planning, especially if you 
have anything joining the two of you together legally. Children will almost 
always create legal complications during which you will either have to 
agree to custody or fight over custody, and you will then be looking at 
interacting with your ex for the rest of you children’s childhoods, as well as 
during major events in their lives if he happens to take an interest in them as 
well. For this reason, it is recommended that you spend enough time 
gathering your evidence. You are planning for the worst while hoping for 
the best. 


In particular, leaving has a lot of different nuances that need to be followed 
that would be incredibly difficult to properly cover in a subchapter, so while 
preparing to leave is absolutely a step in fighting emotional abuse at the 
moment, it will also get its own chapter later within the book. Chapter 9 
will be dedicated to making sure that you know how to leave the 
relationship, guiding you through the most critical parts and what you need 


to make sure that you have. 


Avoid Triggering Abuse 


While you are present in the same home with the abuser, it is important to 
go through the effort of actively avoiding triggering any abuse. While it is 
normally never okay to expect the victim to accommodate the abuser, in this 
case, it can help you slip through the next weeks or months while you 


gather up everything that you will need and make your case just a bit easier. 


This means that you will need to understand what your partner’s triggers 
are. That can be a bit difficult to identify and may take a significant amount 
of time, but if you can do so, you avoid having to deal with as much of the 
abuse. If you wish to figure out your partner’s triggers, you will need to 
think back on all of the times that you have seen your partner explode on 
you. What has caused the explosion? Why did they do it? Can you see a 
pattern in constantly exploding with specific stimuli? Figuring out what 
tends to trigger the abuse can be enough to help you avoid most of the 


iterations of it. 


Perhaps the best way to avoid it is to simply be very agreeable. Do what is 
expected of you without argument. Think of it as keeping the peace until 
you can escape, treating it as a part of your long-term plan rather than as a 
weakness on your part. There is nothing weak about being willing to accept 
what you are being told, no matter how degrading it is, in order to escape. 
Doing so is the epitome of strength, showing your true dedication as a 
survivor. You will survive the abuse, even if it means lowering yourself and 


being willing to not fight back for a short period of time. 


Stress Management 


Of course, being willing to take that abuse means that you will likely be 
quite stressed out as well. After all, having someone tell you that you 
cannot do anything right can be incredibly stressful. You may feel like you 
have done your best, only to have the narcissist or abuser come by and 
laugh in your face. Think of how a child feels after having spent an hour 
building a sandcastle, only to have it immediately kicked down by a bully. 
This is similar to the feelings you may have when you are actively trying 
your best, only to find that your abuser is willing to disparage your 


attempts. 


Of course, the narcissist or abuser just wants to get a rise out of you—if 
they are able to goad you into a response, telling you that you are terrible 
and that you need to stop trying because your attempts are never going to be 
salvageable anyway, they can then use your anger against you. You will 


play right into their trap rather than refusing to play the game at all. 


The best way to avoid having an outburst of your own in response is 
developing several stress management techniques that will work for you. 
Ultimately, this will involve discovering what works best for you. Do you 
do best with working out or going for a jog after being stressed out? Maybe 
you want to meditate? Do you enjoy art? All of that can help keep you cool 


over time. 


However, when you are in the moment, what you really need is a grounding 
technique that will help you stay present. Doing so can help you delay 


yourself and your behaviors just long enough that you will be able to avoid 


doing something that would potentially be dangerous. In particular, we will 
take a look at a simple breathing and grounding technique that will involve 


you utilizing all of your senses. 


When you are feeling stressed, you will want to identify several different 
sensory stimuli from your surroundings as you take deep breaths. Doing so 


can help you calm down enough to avoid lashing out. 


Start by taking in a deep breath. When you do this, you want to inhale for 
five seconds and exhale for five seconds to make sure that you are calming 
your body down. With your next breath, identify five things that you can 
see and acknowledge each consciously. You may see a houseplant, a toy 
that your child left on the floor, your cat, a chair, and the light that is on in 
the hallway. 


With the next breath, you will identify four things that you can hear around 
you. Then, it will be three items that you can touch. Two items that you can 
smell in the air, and lastly, one taste that is either in your mouth or lingering 


in the air. 


Going through these steps can help you calm yourself—it will distract you 
from the immediate surge of negativity that you have in response to abuse 
and allow you to keep a level head. Practice it on your own in private 
several times before you try to use it to keep yourself calm in the moment 


when you are actively being manipulated or abused. 


* Breathe 
deeply 


* Breathe 
deeply 


* Breathe 
deeply 


* Breathe 
deeply 


Self-Care 


With all of the toxicity and negativity swirling around you as you endure 
the abuse, you may feel like you are dragging. What can help you is to 
actively engage in regular self-care as a response. When you are constantly 
in survival mode, you will exhaust your body. You will constantly find 
yourself suffering from the negative effects of anxiety and stress hormones 
that constantly keep you on edge. When you never know where danger will 


strike next, it can be incredibly difficult to keep yourself safe. 


Create a routine that you can use to take care of yourself, even as stress 
feels like it may become insurmountable. When you do this, you are 
actively making it a point to care for yourself, as your partner has made it 
clear that he or she has no interest in helping you to heal or be a healthy 
individual. You will want to make it a point to do several things during your 
self-care routine: Make sure that you get enough sleep regularly. This can 
be difficult, but make sure that you try to sleep at the same time every night, 
no matter how stressed you are about life. You want to be able to remain 
healthy. Keep yourself motivated to actively exercise on a regular basis and 


eat as healthily as you can. 


Beyond that, try to find time to care for yourself as well .Routine will be 
your friend, and actively scheduling in time for yourself, especially to do 
things that you enjoy, will be critical in keeping you on track and able to 


cope with the abuse that you may be enduring. 


Refusing to Engage 


When you do find that you are being caught in an actively abusive situation, 
such as your partner deciding then to begin berating you, the most 
important thing that you can do is refuse to engage. Simply try to tide it 
over as quickly as possible and agree if you have to. Just tell him okay to 
get him off your back and then go on with your life. Again, this is not a sign 
of weakness—you are making it a point to protect yourself from future 
abuse. You are actively guarding yourself and telling yourself that you are 
not willing to tolerate it. This is a good thing—you are showing true 
strength. 


While most people will usually advocate for a lie being left unchallenged 
becomes the truth, that is not necessarily true with the abusive partner. The 
lies are being told whether you are around or not anyway, and you are safer 
in not attempting to counter them at all. It becomes easier to simply agree 
and move on until you are free to escape. If you are not wanting to tolerate 
the abuse in the first place, you need to make it a point to focus on 
surviving long enough to escape. We are not talking about someone 
jokingly telling everyone that you happened to be the one who ate all of the 
cake in the workplace overnight or something else foolish—you are 
considering being berated and told that you are not worthy as an individual. 


Agreeing and moving on may get your abuser off your back sooner. 


Avoiding Personalization 


Of course, despite the fact that you are agreeing, you must keep in mind 
that you are avoiding actually internalizing it. Known as personalization, 
you may find that sometimes, it is hard not to take what the manipulator or 
abuser is saying personally. However, keep in mind that despite the fact that 
the abuser is saying this and despite the fact that the abuser is someone that 
you likely love, and it can be hard to hear your loved one telling you that 


you are nothing. 


Try to approach hearing this abuse the way that you would hear a child 
snapping at you—if your 4-year-old child called you a butt-face because 
you told your child to eat his veggies so he could go to bed, you would not 
live life believing that you actually have a butt for a face. Instead, you 
would probably shrug it off, roll your eyes about it behind your child’s 


back, and move on without actually taking any offense. 


Of course, an abuser is going to be flinging far worse insults most of the 
time. He may tell you that you are ugly, worthless, unlovable, or damaged 
goods. He may try to tell you that you are incredibly lucky that he has been 
so willing to look past your flaws to be with someone like you. You are 
lucky that he has actively been willing to put up with you when you are so 
dumb, incompetent, or careless. He will say this in a matter-of-fact tone that 
may have you tempted to believe it. However, remember that he is lying. 
He does not care about you. He does not want you to be happy—he wants 
you to be controlled, and he will use any methods necessary to get that end 


result. 


The best way to combat this is to simply stop playing. Let him say what he 
says, but then remind yourself that it is not true. Reject what he has to say 
and label it for what it is—an attempt to manipulate you and nothing more. 
If you can reject it as little more than an attempt to manipulate you, you will 
be able to avoid much of the stress that goes along with it. His emotional 
manipulation attempts become infinitely less powerful as soon as you 
remove the power away from them by refusing to allow them to upset you 
any longer. It will be tough. It may even hurt, but refusing to play and 
refusing to take it personally when the abuser spews his lies means that you 


will be able to escape and heal. 


Chapter 4: Recovering from 
Emotional Abuse 


When you have finally pulled the trigger and acknowledged that you have 
been in an abusive relationship, it can be hard to know what comes next. 
You may feel afraid or unsure of how to proceed. You may realize that you 
are broken inside, or that you have some serious healing to do. This is okay 
—you have just endured some serious emotional harm, and that takes time 
to recover from. First and foremost, once you have taken the plunge to 
leave an emotionally abusive relationship, you should celebrate your power 
—leaving a relationship is never easy, and even when you have been 
abused, you likely still have very real feelings for your ex. This is only 
natural. However, over time, you may feel like you are ready to branch out 


—that you want to find a new relationship and a new meaning to life. 


You may find at first that, without proper processing of your abuse, it will 
constantly come back to haunt you. You may find yourself struggling to 
trust other people, or feeling like the other shoe is going to drop at any time. 
You may suffer from anxiety or PTSD—you may suffer from flashbacks or 
insomnia. You may be sick and tired of the suffering, but not know how to 


stop it from continuing. 


When you have suffered from all of this abuse, you may feel like there will 
be no end to it. However, that end does exist—all you need to do is find it. 
You can reclaim your life and begin to heal those wounds that you have 
accrued from your time with an abusive partner. It is not necessarily quick, 
nor is it easy, but there are actions and steps that you can take to help you 


recover from emotional abuse, little by little. 


You may find that it helps to think of this process one day at a time. If one 
day seems like it is too much to process, try thinking of it like one hour at a 
time, or even one minute or second at a time if you find that you are feeling 
particularly sensitive at that point in time. You will inevitably feel moments 
of weakness during which you want nothing more than to give in and go 
back to your abuser. This is common—it may be easier to be with the 
abuser. It may be more familiar and therefore, more comfortable. It may 
even be that you find that you miss your past and the times during which 
you and your partner were happy. However, steel your resolve and keep 


moving forward. You cannot stop an abuser from abusing. 


This chapter will act as a guide for you to begin to recover from the abuse 
that you have suffered. Little by little, if you can implement these 
techniques into your life, and you can follow the steps, you will find that 
your wounds slowly begin to heal. They may leave their scars, but the 


injuries will no longer be festering. 


Take Time to Grieve 


It can be disconcerting for abuse victims to realize that they do truly miss 
their abusers even after having suffered at their hands, whether physically 
or emotionally. However, this is normal. You are grieving the loss of a 
relationship. You are effectively giving up on the relationship that you 
thought that you had. You are giving up on the person that you thought you 
loved, who you may still deeply love, but who did not love or respect you. 
This can be one of the hardest things you will ever do—you find that you 
cannot possibly live your life healthily and happily if you do not leave your 


partner, but you know that leaving your partner will also hurt. 


It is appropriate to take the time that you find that you need to grieve. 
Spend the time acknowledging the hurt that you feel and the pain that you 
have endured. It was not your fault, nor did you deserve it, but that does not 


make the process any easier. 


Grief comes in seven distinct stages: shock and denial, pain and guilt, anger 
and bargaining, depression, the upward turn, reconstruction, and finally, 
acceptance. These stages are not all linear—you may make progress only to 
find that a significant event or an anniversary passes and sends you right 
back to denial or anger. This is normal, and remember that no two people 
grieve the same way. What remains true, however, is that if you find that 
your guilt is so overwhelming that you cannot function properly or get 
through your days, or you find that you are coping unhealthily, it may be 
time to seek help from a trusted friend or family member, or from a 
professional that can take the time to talk to you and help you get the tools 


that you will need. 


Pain and guilt 


i a Bt Anger and 
Jepression 
P bargaining 


The upward 
onstruction 
tum 


Acceptance 


Reclaim Your Life 


Because emotional abusers so frequently try to take over your life and turn 
it into their own, making sure that you are obedient and willing to do 
whatever it takes to please them, you may find that you have lived much of 
your life losing your time and your life. This means that you have spent 
weeks, months, or even years sacrificing your time, your desires, and things 


that you may have wanted to try, all in the name of the relationship. 


A healthy way to begin to heal from that, from having to sacrifice yourself, 
your desires, and your happiness, is to reclaim it. Reclaim your time— 
spend it doing what you want to do. Eat that cake that would have gotten 
you a disapproving look. Spend time with that friend that your ex hated. 
Chase after that passion that you had thrown aside after your ex had told 


you that it was a pipe dream. 


This may tough to do, especially if you have found that you really suffered 
within your relationship or if you were regularly punished for doing 
anything for yourself. However, the best way to ensure that you can reclaim 
your life for yourself and begin to heal is simply by doing it. Flex those 
self-care muscles and get back into your hobbies. Reach out to those friends 
and family members that were cast aside. Find new ways to live your life 
for yourself, and follow through. While it will be difficult at first, you will 
very quickly fall back into the habit of reclaiming life for yourself and 
loving every moment of it. Now, this does not mean that you will 
necessarily be entirely stress-free, or that you have healed completely, but 
you will start to undo those strings installed that told you that you cannot 


possibly live for yourself. 


Create Your Boundaries—and Enforce Them 


Oftentimes, those who are abused feel like they cannot have boundaries, or 
they do not know how to enforce any boundaries that they do set. They may 
have always been entirely disregarded, so you feel like they do not matter 
anyway, or you may have been punished or made to feel crazy any time that 
you attempted to set a boundary, so it became simpler to instead reject the 


idea of having those boundaries at all. 


However, boundaries are healthy. They are normal and expected in most 
normal relationships. These boundaries are your way of marking that you 
will only tolerate certain behaviors and that anything beyond those 
behaviors will be deemed inappropriate and not welcomed by you. For 
example, a normal and healthy boundary to have is to not accept name 
calling. You may have a boundary of not being called names, and if anyone 
were to call you names, you would take a step back and reevaluate that 
relationship altogether. That is a healthy response to such abuse, and no one 


would bat an eye at it. 


However, your abusive ex may have made you feel like setting a reasonable 
boundary like that is problematic to your relationship or that it means that 
you do not trust or love your partner. This is not true—even marriages have 


boundaries, and those boundaries keep the relationship healthy. 


When you set your boundaries, you are telling other people that you respect 
yourself enough to not tolerate disrespect. You tell those around you that 
you care about yourself and that you will not be made to feel less 
significant or unworthy. You declare that you will protect yourself and not 


let yourself fall for abuse again. 


What is important here is that you set those boundaries and enforce them as 
well. Put distance between yourself and those who want to break your 
boundaries. If people want to repeatedly stomp all over those boundaries 
that you have set, then you are probably better off without those people in 


your life. 


Even if the person that is constantly breaching your boundary is a family 
member or a loved one, you are well within your rights to end the 
relationship and take a huge step back. Remember, if those around you truly 
loved you, they would respect your boundaries, and anyone who is willing 


to stomp all over what you want or need does not truly care for you. 


Forgive Yourself 


No, this does not mean you should forgive your abuser. However, you are 
deserving of forgiveness from yourself. What you went through was not 
okay, and you never should have had to live a life being abused. You did not 
deserve what happened to you. However, do not waste your time feeling 
guilty for remaining in that situation for too long. Instead, put your energy 


toward forgiving yourself. 


Remember that forgiveness and forgetting are not the same things—you 
have absolutely learned from the past and just through reading this book 
right now, you are putting in the effort to do better in the future. You are 
making it a point to learn how best to protect and defend yourself, and in 


doing so, you promise yourself that you will take better care of yourself. 


However, you still deserve to forgive yourself. You did not ask to be 
abused. You did not know that the relationship would end up the way that it 
did. You did not know that your partner would slowly become a monster 


wearing his mask, nor did you ever want to be in that position in the first 


place. No one wants to be abused, and it is incredibly easy to overlook 
those early warning signs, reminding yourself that you love your partner 
and that it must have been a one-time deal. You tell yourself that it will not 


happen again, and then you find yourself trapped in the cycle of abuse. 


Nevertheless, you have committed to living a better life. You have left the 
relationship, and that says that you are committed to bettering yourself. Let 
go of the guilt that you have been feeling toward yourself, and forgive 
yourself once and for all. You are not disregarding or forgetting the abuse— 
you are simply choosing to no longer let it rule your life. You are 
acknowledging that you did not deserve it. You are acknowledging that you 
did not ask for it. You are acknowledging that your ex was the one with the 
problem. Above all, you are acknowledging that you have broken free and 


making a promise to yourself that it will never happen again. 


Reclaim Your Narrative 


When you were in the midst of your relationship, you likely found that your 
relationship and your ex were constantly changing the narrative that you 
lived by. Not only were you constantly being told that you were wrong 
about what was happening, but you were likely also blamed for the abuse 
that you endured on a regular basis. You may have been told that you were 
to blame when the abuser lost his or her cool. You may have been told that 
you are a magnet for the abuse. You may have been told that whatever 


happened was not abusive. 


Now is the time to reclaim that narrative. No longer do you have to live by 
the abuser’s doctrine. You can determine what has happened for yourself 
and make sure that you tell yourself the truth. You are no longer bound to 
do whatever the abuser has told you to do. You no longer have to make it a 
point to agree with the abuser just to make sure that you do not suffer 


further. 


When you finally reclaim the narrative, you are able to define what has 
actually happened. You get to tell the story from your own perspective, 
acknowledging that you were abused and that you never deserved it. You 
can point out all the ways that your ex tried to force you to give in to the 
narrative that the abuser tried to tell everyone, and you can finally tell other 


people the truth. 


When you reclaim your story, you are effectively taking back the power. 
You are telling yourself that the abuser no longer has that control over you. 
You are making it clear that your life’s story is your own and that what 


happened was horrendous, but you are able to protect yourself further. You 


can correct the record. You are rejecting the abuser’s attempt to keep you 


silent, and you are rejecting the constant gaslighting. 


This is perhaps the most personal of the steps toward emotional recovery— 
you are acknowledging what has happened for what it is. You are choosing 
to make it clear to yourself, and to anyone that you choose to share it with, 
that you did not deserve what happened. Remember that this is your own 
story, and you do not have to share it if you chose not to. While some 
people find it empowering to share that story with others, you may choose 


to keep it to yourself, and that is okay. 


Seek Professional Help 


There are very few people in this world that would not benefit from some 
sort of guidance from a licensed psychologist at one point or another in 
their life. If you have been suffering from abuse, you may find that getting 
this help is actually imperative to your healing. When you get help from 
someone else, you are able to be given the coping mechanisms that you will 


need to truly begin to heal from abuse. 


There is nothing inherently wrong with seeing a therapist, though there is 
still quite the stigma around it. You are not going out of your way to find a 
crutch, and you are not necessarily seeking out medication. However, what 
you are doing is figuring out how to move forward in life and heal. Would 
you judge someone with a giant gash on their arm for going to the doctor 
for stitches? Would you tell someone with a broken foot to walk it off and 
stop being such a wimp? Probably not—and you should look at a mental 


health issue in the same way. 


If you have just escaped an emotionally abusive relationship, there is no 
doubt about it—you likely have emotional injuries. These wounds cannot 
begin to heal until you clean them out, and therapy can provide the skills 
necessary to do exactly that. You can learn how to better cope with your 
emotions, how to undo the emotional damage, and how to begin to better 
yourself. All of this comes together, and you can begin to heal once and for 
all. 


There are several different types of therapy that you can try in order to heal 


yourself. You may choose to seek out a therapist that is of the same religion 


as you. You may choose to investigate traditional psychotherapy, in which 
you talk over your feelings and thought processes over an extended period 
of time to try to come to some sort of resolution. You may choose to try Eye 
Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR), a type of therapy 
that is commonly used to help veterans with their PTSD over a relatively 


short period of time. 


A commonly used therapy that you may find beneficial is cognitive 
behavioral therapy. This is a therapy that seeks to combine the best of 
cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy into a form of treatment that 
addresses both your thoughts and your behaviors to help you heal. Within 
this therapy type, you will be given several different tools to help you 
identify, restructure, and change your ways of thinking in order to directly 
influence your behaviors. This works through acknowledging the cycle of 
thoughts, influencing your feelings, which influence your behaviors. When 
you change just one in that cycle, you are able to create a domino effect that 
changes it all. Through providing actionable coping mechanisms, such as 
creating affirmations, learning the process of cognitive restructuring, and 
other similar tools, you will be prepared to handle nearly any problem with 


the tools provided. 


This means that you will not only be able to finally address your own 
trauma associated with the abusive relationship; you will also begin to heal 
whatever made you vulnerable to that abuse in the first place. You will learn 
how to prevent yourself from becoming a victim in the future. You will 


learn to be the best you can be. 


Chapter 5: The Narcissistic Abuser 


Addressing the emotional abuser is always a struggle, but at the very least, 
the emotional abuser is usually aware of his actions. The narcissistic abuser, 
on the other hand, can sometimes be even more persistent, more dangerous, 
and more insidious than the emotional abuser. The narcissist is driven to 
abuse by a personality disorder, whereas the emotional abuser may not be, 


and that is one of the major differences there 


Emotional abusers tend to abuse because they want to be powerful. They 
abuse because they want to be strong. They abuse because they want 
control. The narcissistic abuser, on the other hand, is different. The 
narcissistic abuser is driven by personality shortcomings and simply not 
being able to help himself. He cannot help the fact that he has a tendency to 
abuse, and even worse, his personality type prevents him from ever 


acknowledging that he may have been the root of the problem all along. 


Narcissistic individuals are incredibly needy. They demand attention and 
conformity at all times, and the mere notion that they may not get what they 
had originally wanted. What is interesting is that narcissistic abuse tends to 
follow the exact same patterns, no matter where you go. It may even seem 
that people that are subject to narcissistic abuse feel like everyone has read 
the same books. Two people who have suffered at the hands of two separate 
narcissists can almost always come together and nod sagely as they listen to 


what the other has to say about their experience. 


While emotional abusers are capable of change, and people of all kinds can 


show signs of emotional abuse at some time, such as yelling at someone to 


shut up in the heat of the moment, the narcissist does not. The narcissist is 
someone that can never change due to their personality type. They are 
disordered by nature—that is to say that they never think about the world in 
the way that an ordinary person would. There is too much lacking in the 
narcissistic personality type to allow for meaningful change or even the 
acknowledgment that the narcissist’s victim was even human enough to 


matter. 


At the end of the day, the emotional abuser is, at the very least a real person. 
As you are about to see, the narcissist is not. The narcissist hides behind a 
mask that is used to shield his true self from ever seeing the light of day, 
and this can add a whole new level of struggle to recovering from the 
emotional abuse that the narcissist naturally emanates. He does not mean to 


do this—it comes naturally to him. 


However, knowing that it was a natural intention of a disordered individual, 
little more than a delusional attempt to draw the victim in, does nothing for 
the victim in terms of healing. In fact, learning that the individual that the 
victim loved and knew was a lie all along can be particularly traumatizing 


on its own. 


Within this chapter, we will walk through what narcissistic personality 
disorder entails in order to get a complete understanding of what it is. We 
will look at how the narcissist tends to present himself to the world, 
particularly looking at the difference between the covert, over, and 
malignant narcissists and how they all interact with each other. We will take 


the time to go over what it is that the narcissist looks for in a target, and 


finally, we will begin to unpack the unmitigated disaster of disorganization 


that is the narcissist’s mind and abuse. 


Narcissistic Personality Disorder 


Narcissistic personality disorder is named for the myth of Narcissus, who 
was said to fall in love with his own reflection after having rejected the 
advances of a young nymph named Echo. She was so devastated by his 
rejection that she faded away, giving us the source of the echo that you 
would hear if you were to yell something in the mountains. This gives most 
people the impression that the narcissist is someone vain and self-loving, 
but not particularly dangerous. Narcissistic tendencies can be seen in 
annoying characters in media, for example, who dote needlessly over their 
own image. However, there is far more to NPD than simply admiring one’s 


reflection. 


Those suffering from NPD typically present with several traits that come 
together to create someone that lacks empathy strongly considers his or her 
own self more important than others and typically requires a constant and 
excessive need of admiration to feel validated and like he matters. He is not 
comfortable in his own skin unless he is able to gain the attention and 


admiration from others. 


NPD is known as a cluster B personality disorder—these are disorders that 
directly impact one’s ability to interact socially and is found alongside those 
with histrionic personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, and 
antisocial personality disorder. All four of these types of disorders are 
particularly known for their dramatics and unpredictability. In particular, 
they are usually quite emotional and difficult to manage, and because the 


very way that they see the world has been so incredibly skewed, they 


struggle to ever actually recognize that they may actually have some sort of 
problem. 


With NPD in particular, you will see several symptoms, of which five must 
be present to be clinically diagnosable. These symptoms must arise in 
several different contexts over several different times, showing that they are 
pervasive in both recurrence and situation. The symptoms in particular that 
you can expect the clinically diagnosed narcissist to show include: a 
grandiose sense of self-importance, self-esteem that must be validated by 
the actions of other people, exploitative behavior, hurtful behavior, a lack of 
empathy, a focus on power and success, the assumption of being unique, a 


sense of entitlement, and a fixation with perfection. 


perfection 


Obsession S 
with Exploit ative 


Lack of 
empathy 


Fixated on 
fantasies of 
power 


Needfor Delusion of 
admiration uniqueness 


NPD exists with people who assume that they are perfect, with delusions on 
how they deserve respect and power, and they then go out of their way to 
exploit others to get that power. They are entirely convinced that they are 


entitled to anything and everything that they want because they are so 
unique and perfect. They feel like no one around them can possibly relate to 
who they are or understand the struggles of being as incredibly high-class 
as the narcissist, and because of that, they typically spend as little time as 
possible with people that they deem to be beneath them. They would rather 
only associate with people that they see as their equals, meaning that 


anyone beneath them is only meant to be used and abused. 


The Narcissist 


What makes the narcissist so incredibly dangerous then, is the fact that the 
narcissist is not interested in interacting with other people unless they are 
his equal. Any relationships that he fosters will either be with people that 
he, himself, admires, or that he feels like he can use in some way. 
Effectively, either way has the same result—he is able to gain something 
out of his relationship. He sees the relationship as purely a stepping stone, 
drawing from traditional Machiavellian logic, but unlike the Machiavellian, 
the narcissist is likely to make mistakes. The narcissist believes that 
because he is so perfect and always right, that he does not have to be as 
careful as the other people. While still meticulous, he is going to ultimately 
do what he wants, when he wants, because he feels like he is entitled to 
doing exactly that. He would prefer to be able to act in ways that he sees to 
be beneficial to him. He wants to use people to his own enjoyment or to fill 


his excessive need for attention, something known as the narcissistic 


supply. 


At the end of the day, the narcissist will seek out valid forms of supply from 
other people, and depending on the type of narcissist that you are dealing 
with, you may see very different iterations of how they will go out of their 
way to get what they want. 

The overt narcissist is the one that everyone thinks of—he is grand and 
loud, demanding, and expectant. He feels that he is entitled to anything that 
he may want, and he will get it in any way necessary to ensure that he is 
satisfied. This is the one who believes that he is the best gift to mankind, 
even if everyone is just barely tolerant of him as an individual. He does not 
care about whether or not he is liked—all that matters to him is his success 


and the admiration that he wants. 


The covert narcissist is almost the exact opposite in many ways—the covert 
narcissist wants to be legitimately liked. He genuinely wants to be the best 
that there is, rather than simply believing that he is, but he struggles with 
his own emotional regulation. While the grandiose narcissist knows that he 
is the best, the covert narcissist needs that validation from other people in 
order to get it. The covert narcissist’s self-esteem is entirely dependent upon 
how other people around him see him at that moment, and if he is not being 
showered in attention, he feels unworthy and will oftentimes play the victim 


role in order to get that attention that he desires. 


Finally, the malignant narcissist is the scariest of them all. Unlike the other 
two, who simply want to be validated and admired, the malignant narcissist 
just wants attention. He is typically quite sadistic as well, meaning that he 
enjoys watching other people suffer in misery. This means that he may find 
great joy out of intentionally setting up situations that will end in disasters, 


just to watch it all play out. He enjoys hurting people just for fun, 


intentionally making relationships fall apart, taking challenges such as 
convincing someone to fall head over heels in love with him before 
discarding them like garbage, and more. All he cares about is enjoying 


himself in any way. 


Recognizing the narcissist, no matter what the form, can generally be quite 
difficult for one reason: The narcissist’s personality is constantly changing. 
If you have ever seen a narcissist go from person to person, it can be 
incredibly eerie just how differently the interactions become from person to 
person. The narcissist may be a fun sports-loving personality with one 
person, only to shift into reserved and analytical with the next. The finesse 
with which he can shift personalities with ease is incredibly daunting. 


However, this is what makes his abuse particularly painful to tolerate. 


The Narcissist’s Target 


Before discussing the methods of abuse, however, it is imperative that you 
understand the various personality types that become the narcissist’s 
preferred targets. Just as the narcissist has a set type of behaviors that seem 
to occur no matter who the narcissist is, they all tend to share an incredibly 
similar personality preference for their long-term victims. The victims that 
are going to be pursued for long-term relationships are ones that are going 
to e relatively easy to subdue. Narcissists are particularly lazy when it 
comes to their relationships with other people, and because of that, they will 
choose the path of least resistance wherever possible. They will 
intentionally decide to work toward a relationship with someone who they 
think will be easy to manage just so they always shave easy access to the 
narcissistic supply that they desire. 


In particular, there seem to be five distinct personality traits that attract the 
narcissist, and the best way to sum them all up into one word would be to 
call the target codependent. While the target may not always be 
codependent, they will show several signs of codependency and have 
enough of the features that the narcissist will not have to work too hard. The 


traits that the narcissist seems to favor most of all are people that are 
empathetic, who has had a rocky upbringing, are caregivers by nature, are 
conflict-avoidant, have low self-esteem, and are naturally people-pleasers. 
These five traits come together to create a person that is well-suited to tend 


to the narcissist’s every whim and need. 


Dysfunctional 
upbringing 


The 


NMarcissist’s 
Prey 


An empathetic individual is going to be able to relate to the narcissist or 
think that he or she can, and in relating, the empathetic individual will feel 
more inclined to help. They will want to help the narcissist, seeing someone 
that is broken, but who can be fixed with compassion and care. The 
empathy of the individual typically goes hand-in-hand with the caregiver 
nature of the narcissist’s target. Because they want to help other people at 
any cost, they will diligently put in the time and effort to tending to the 
narcissist’s needs. This leads the narcissist to getting that supply fix that he 
wanted, even though over time, it becomes too much for the empathetic one 
to take. 


By ensuring that the natural target of the narcissist is also conflict-avoidant 
after having grown up in dysfunction, the narcissist is able to net a target 
that is far less likely to notice the red flags in their relationship. Abusive 
tendencies, such as emotional manipulation, will not seem as alarming 
when the individual that is being manipulated has grown up around similar 
abuse. Effectively, the empathetic target has never built up a solid boundary 
between abuse and a healthy relationship, and because of that, met with the 
fact that the target is likely a people-pleaser that wants to avoid conflict, the 


target will simply take the abuse without a word. 


Targets like this are commonly deemed codependent—a term that implies 
that they are enabling the narcissist’s abusive tendencies. The codependent 
is effectively the opposite of the narcissist: He or she will have a need to 
feel needed, in perfect contrast to the narcissist’s need for admiration. If the 
narcissist wants to feel wanted and the codependent wants to feel needed, 
you would think that the two are a natural match made in heaven. However, 
there is one particular problem with this match—the narcissist will continue 


to take until the codependent eventually burns out. 


The codependent is so entirely dependent upon the relationship for any sort 
of validation in life that she may not realize just how much she is giving up, 
or recognize that the harm being done is truly problematic. The narcissist 
should not be able to override any and all needs for the codependent, and 
yet that is exactly what happens. The codependent’s need for feeling like 
she is helping other people then prevents her from ever actually taking care 
of herself. 


The codependent tends to be someone who has already grown up with his 
or her needs being marginalized in favor of someone else—this means that 
she is not likely to care or notice much about her own needs being forgone 
in favor of the narcissist. She will simply see it as life as usual and continue 


on her way without a second thought. 


While the codependent and the narcissist absolutely do meet those needs for 
each other, this is perhaps one of the more toxic combinations of personality 
types—the narcissist is effectively enabled, allowing for further justification 
of the abuse and control that he feels the need to exhibit. The codependent 
continues to define her own self-worth as being entirely dependent upon the 
narcissist’s need of her. In the end, the two bring out the worst for each 
other by meeting their most desired need in a way that is harmful for all 
involved. They become a toxic relationship, in which they are both 
incredibly dangerous toward each other. These relationships rarely actually 


pan out particularly well as they end in burnout and further abuse. 


Identifying Narcissistic Abusers 


Narcissistic abuse harms everyone involved, and because it is so incredibly 
harmful to people, it is imperative that you understand what to look for in 
order to know what to avoid. Narcissistic abusers, however, are notoriously 
difficult to identify. Because they are commonly able to shift from 
personality to personality, changing their presented personas more often 
than teenage girls change their outfits, it can be incredibly difficult to keep 


track of who is the narcissist and what they look like. 


Thankfully, there is a method that you can use to identify the narcissistic 
abuser once you have had some time to interact with the other person. 
Because narcissists can be so incredibly persistent and are so dangerous and 
difficult to deal with as the mask comes off, avoidance is usually the best 
policy, but it is not always easy to avoid someone if you do not know what 
you are doing. Because of this, it is important that you learn to identify the 
narcissist early on. In learning to identify the narcissist, the next time you 
believe that someone may be one, you can instead choose to avoid them 


altogether instead of attempting to interact with them. 


The method that you will be using to identify the narcissist involves three 
simple steps—you will look at how they talk to you, you will look at how 
what they say makes you feel, and then you will identify how they are 
behaving. Each of these steps, if you spend the time to look at each, will 
help provide that valuable insight into whether or not they are a narcissist or 


other incredibly negative personality 


What 
they do 


What they say 


When you are paying attention to what the narcissist has to say, you are 
going to be looking for words that either come across as far too positive or 
far too negative. Either end of the spectrum bodes ill for the individual’s 
status as a stable individual. If you hear strongly positive words, you may 
be showered in affection and praise—however, this praise will be far more 
than is considered normal. It will err on the side of excessive, such as 
telling the victim that they are the center of the narcissist’s universe, or that 
the narcissist promises to make the victim his queen. This excessively 
positive, lavish speech is a warning to you that he is building you up. While 
it is normal to hear words of affection and admiration from a partner, if they 
can go on and on about how loved you are, they may simply be trying to 
win you over for their own gain. This is known as love bombing and will be 


discussed further in the narcissist’s tactics. 


On the other hand, strongly negative words imply that the individual is 
quite negative—they may talk down about other people around them, or 
point out that their boss is a terrible person. They act as though they are 
better than everyone that they are discussing. This should be treated as a red 
flag—if you were ever to stand up against the narcissist, you would be 


lumped into this category as well. 


Sometimes, the words of the narcissist show that there is no empathy 


involved—they will talk and act like you are not there, or respond to your 


own struggles. If they seem entirely impervious to emotions or relating to 
you when you talk about having a tough time, you are likely to struggle in 


future interactions and conversations. 


Finally, one last common tactic of the narcissist’s words is to use words that 
paint them as a victim—while the narcissist is convinced that he is superior 
to all, he will also inevitably suffer from what is referred to as a narcissistic 
injury—this is when the narcissist’s idea of perfection is challenged in some 
way, such as the narcissist not getting that promotion he was gunning for. 
When this happens, they are suddenly the victim—they will make it sound 
like it was an intentional slight rather than something that was decided upon 


because the person who was hired was actually competent and deserving. 


What you feel 


After having spent the time to listen to their words, you want to know how 
they make you feel as well. This will involve you identifying how you tend 
to feel when exposed to the other party, such as wondering if you happen to 
feel normal. Sometimes, the narcissist will intentionally make you feel 
either incredibly positively or incredibly negatively—usually, it will 
oscillate between the two. What is incredibly common, however, is the 
feeling of a lack of control. In the presence of the narcissist, the narcissist 
controls it all. They choose what they do, how they do it, and how you will 
feel. They will micromanage everything in order to get their own desired 
results, and if you attempt to fight them on it, they will do everything in 
their power to make you as miserable as possible. This is because they feel 
like they deserve to be right and respected—they want to be in utter control 


of everything around them. 


When you realize that you often feel like you are floating on cloud 9, you 
may be in the presence of a narcissist. While it is great that you feel so 
good, it is also worth wondering if the endless flattery and affection that 
you are getting is designed to hurt you. Sometimes, it is legitimate, but far 


more often, it is malicious and deliberate in order to control you. 


On the other hand, if you find that you regularly feel like you are not good 
enough or like nothing you do will ever be good enough, it may be time to 
wonder if the other person is a narcissist. They will often spend so much 
time talking about themselves, their own achievements, and how they 
would like to reach their own goals, they usually unintentionally put you 
down instead. They compare you and them without thinking about it—but 
the narcissist thinks he is the greatest gift on earth, so of course, he is going 
to sing himself high praises while simultaneously brushing you off as 


mediocre at best. 


What they do 


Finally, you want to figure out the narcissist’s behavioral habits as well. The 
narcissist is rarely ever actually considerate of the time of anyone other than 
the people that the narcissist believes are his equals or superiors. Anyone 
else can wait, and it does not matter how annoyed the other person is. They 
will usually end up quite insensitive and rude, but if you ever try to call out 


the behaviors, you get shrugged off like it does not matter. 


This is the nature of the narcissist—he does not care about other people. He 
will make a quick excuse or will attack you if you try to call him out, as 


narcissists tend to be particularly volatile when they are interacting with 


someone else, and they will then blow off their responsibility. They will 
find some way to be the victim, whether because you so rudely accused 
them or because they do not care about what they have done and how it 


impacts others. 


At the end of the day, if you find that the person seems to behave like a 
narcissist, using extreme words, triggering extreme feelings, and constantly 
quick to anger and willing to deflect blame, you may find that you are better 
off running in the other direction as quickly as possible. While it may be 
tempting when you see how charming that the narcissist comes off as, or 
when you hear the flattery that the narcissist gives you, remember that it is 
never worth the hassle, and you are generally better off giving up and 
avoiding the situation altogether. You will be happier without wasting your 


time trying to keep up with the mind games. 


Chapter 6: Narcissistic Abuse 


Finally, with that image in mind of how the narcissist presents himself and 
why the narcissist does what he does, you will be able to better understand 
the abuse that the narcissist is willing to inflict on other people. It will 
become important for you to recognize not only the warning signs of 
narcissistic abuse, which are a bit different than those reserved for 
emotional abuse, but also make sure that you are able to recognize several 


of the most common narcissistic abuse tendencies. 


This chapter will focus solely on teaching you about narcissistic abuse. You 
will be given guides to what the abuse is, how it works, why it is harmful, 
and why it is favored. More about fighting the narcissist’s abuse will 
happen in Chapter 8: Disarming the narcissist, in which you will be given 
several strategies for countering the narcissist in the moment in order to 
avoid allowing the narcissist to walk all over you any longer than he will 
otherwise try. With the successful understanding of these methods of abuse, 
you will be able to recognize when the abuse is occurring, allowing you to 
combat it if you have found yourself in a situation in which you cannot 
simply cut off or avoid the narcissist, which will always be the easiest, most 


efficient method of avoiding the harm that comes along with them. 


Signs of Narcissistic Abuse 


Narcissistic abuse is particularly insidious. It is designed to control and 
coerce, much like many of the emotional manipulation tactics, but beyond 
that, narcissistic abuse is powerful because oftentimes, the narcissist is not 
even aware of the abuse as it occurs. They simply go about their lives 
without self-awareness or social awareness to understand what they are 
doing or how it impacts others. They are effectively slaves to their 
emotions, making them particularly dangerous. If you are constantly giving 
in to your emotional state, you are likely going to be making some 
particularly dangerous decisions that can absolutely ruin your chances of 


success as you wish to see it. 


When you are being exposed to narcissistic abuse, you will feel like your 
whole world has been turned upside down. It will be like nothing makes 
sense anymore, and like you cannot tell right from wrong. Imagine that you 
have just been spun over and over again until you are dizzy, and then you 
are thrown into the water with a blindfold. How do you figure out which 


way is up or down if you cannot touch the bottom of the water? 
The answer is, you can’t. 


The same thing happens with narcissistic abuse. Without guidance and 
understanding the signs of abuse, you can feel like that person in the water 
without any visual input or sensory input to help guide them to the surface. 
Of course, if they mistakenly swim downward instead of upwards, there 
may be some serious problems that could be fatal. While narcissistic abuse 


is not particularly likely to kill you, as it is primarily psychological in 


nature, it can leave you doubting yourself, your reality, and everything that 


you know. 


In particular, when you want to identify that you are actively being 
victimized by narcissistic abuse, it will once again be time for self- 
reflection. While narcissistic abuse itself can get tricky to identify, the signs 
of the abuse in the victim are much more prominent, and if you know what 
you are looking for and can identify them, you can say quite confidently 


that you have been victimized by emotional or narcissistic abuse. 


As before, you will need to think about yourself as you go through this 
section. See how much of the signs of emotional predation from the 
narcissist seem to resonate with you, and if you find that you can strongly 
relate to the signs being provided, it is time to begin looking long and hard 


at your relationships to find the narcissist hiding in human clothing. 


Dissociation and Narcissistic Abuse 


One such symptom of narcissistic abuse is the experience of dissociation. 


This is effectively your mind’s way of separating the abuse from yourself— 


you will feel emotionally, and sometimes even physically detached from 
your body and mind. This is essentially the experience of a traumatic event 
—your mind tries to cope by separating away from the abuse and trauma in 


order to survive, or at the very least to no longer suffer. 


It is common knowledge that prey animals will suddenly freeze and stop 
moving when they are hunted and caught—this is likely quite similar in 
response. They freeze and dissociate so they do not suffer, and in doing so, 
they are detached from what has happened. When you have this happen to 
yourself, you may find that you are largely numb as an individual. Your 
emotions do not seem so important or meaningful to you anymore, and 


instead, you feel nothing at all. 


Of course, this is no way to live your life. You should be able to enjoy your 


life, which means you must be able to get rid of the traumatic aspect. 


Unmet Needs 


Another common sign that you are suffering from narcissistic abuse is that 
you lack the ability to meet your needs, or you chose not to. If you find that 
you have several unmet needs and wants building up, you may want to 
consider if these are unmet simply because you have not had time or 
resources, or because you have instead chosen to stop attempting to achieve 
what you have always wanted in favor of making sure that you cater to a 


narcissist in your life. 


Your Physical Health is Failing 


The mind and body are closely linked, and if you are suffering from anxiety 
or depression as a direct result of the narcissistic abuse that you have been 
enduring, you may find that your body itself may begin to get sick as well. 
Your body is effectively being flooded with stress hormones from the 
constant turmoil, and that constant stress leads to your body wearing down 
as well. That stress puts unnecessary wear on your heart and keeps you 


from sleeping, which wears down your immune system as well. 


If you find that you may be getting sicker more often than you used to, it is 
possible that a narcissist is to blame, especially in tandem with several other 
of the symptoms within this section. If you are getting sicker, do not try to 
brush it off as unrelated—your mind and body work together, and just 
because the narcissist may never lay a hand on you, his abuse can still cause 


significant physical harm. 


You Distrust Everyone 


As your body fails you and you find that you are largely miserable most of 
the time, you may also realize that along with the numbness comes this 
sense of not being able to trust others—you feel like you cannot trust that 
other people will not also be trying to hurt and abuse you, especially after 
coming to the conclusion that you are being abused in the first place. 
Knowing that someone that you loved was actually a monster in disguise 
can be incredibly earth-shattering for the individual going through it. 
Effectively, you are not only dealing with the fact that you were lied to and 
abused, but you are also suddenly mourning the loss of a person that you 


thought you knew that never existed in the first place. That is particularly 


traumatic, and if you do not address that trauma, you are likely going to 


continue to struggle with trusting other people. 


You Protect the Narcissist Without Knowing Why 


And the fact that you do it may drive you insane. You do not know why you 
are protecting the narcissist, but it feels natural. This is because those in 
abusive relationships tend to rationalize, minimize, and then deny the abuse 
that was endured. Though you may be cognitively aware of the abuse that 
you are enduring, you must also recognize that the abuse is also leading you 


to protect the abuser. 


It is incredibly common for abuse victims to tell themselves that the abuse 
and abuser are not so bad—it is the only way that they can cope with the 
abuse as it occurs. If they admitted that the abuse was as bad as it truly was, 
they would be stuck with the cognitive dissonance of not getting out when 
they need to as they continue to be abused. It becomes easier for the mind 
to simply push away the abuse and pretend that it was not as bad as it 


actually was. 


However, think about the implication there—if you are minimizing the 
abuse, you are delegitimizing your own experience. You are saying that you 
are okay taking the abuse because it was not abusive in the first place. You 
are effectively burying your head and pretending that everything is fine 
because you cannot see what is happening, though it is clearly happening, 
and you are, at least to some degree, fully aware of it. Ask yourself, though, 


if you would tell your son or daughter to do what you are doing. If it were 


your child in your position, would you encourage your child that the abuse 
was not so bad or would you tell your child to break free and enjoy life? 

When you must identify whether or not you have been enduring the abuse 
of the narcissist, you are going to want to consider each of the previously 
listed traits. Do you feel an incessant need to protect the narcissist? Do you 
feel like the abuse is not actually as bad? Do you find that your health is 
worsening, or that you are living with constant anxiety? Are you simply 


numb constantly in between those bursts of numbness? 


This is a particularly painful realization to come to, knowing that you have 
been victimized, but it is so incredibly important. You need to be able to 
acknowledge if you have been hurt so you can prioritize healing. In 
knowing that you have been abused, you can start making an effort to 
prevent it from happening again in the future. You will be able to fight 
back, cleaning up your life, and finding the best way to work toward the life 
that you know that you deserve. You will be able to achieve that life with 


ease if you give yourself the time to do so. 


Now, it is time to delve into the narcissist’s favorite tactics to use and abuse 
other people. As you continue reading from this point on, you will gain 
special insight into what and why the narcissist does what he does. In 
particular, we are addressing some of the most prevalent manipulation 
tactics that the narcissist will make a part of his own toolkit. You will be 
walked through mirroring—the art of the narcissist changing who he 
presents himself as in order to win favor. You will then see how the 
narcissist is able to keep those relationships with love bombing and 
devaluation. You will look at gaslighting, the art of convincing people of 


things that are not actually true. You will see projection and how the 


narcissist loves to deflect his own flaws onto other people. You will see 
how the narcissist is able to so expertly reverse roles and somehow always 
end up as the victim—but only the best victim that has had it way worse 


than anyone else in the history of victimhood. 


Mirroring and the Narcissist 


You may have heard the term mirroring before—usually, it is used in the 
context of discussing neuro-linguistic programming. However, here, we are 
talking about an entirely different type of mirroring. The narcissist has a 
special kind of mirroring, during which he is able to project exactly which 
personality he thinks will be necessary to win favor from the person that is 


meant to be manipulated one way or the other. 


When the narcissist is going to be mirroring someone, he first focuses on 
who his target is. Let’s say that we have our narcissist, Ned, and his target, a 
young woman named Talia. Ned sees Talia and immediately decides that 
she will be his next target. He goes over to her, the perfect picture of 
charisma and charm, and begins to talk. He makes a quick judgment call— 
based on her clothing, she is into country lifestyles, and he discusses how 


he has been dying to go horseback riding. 


It turns out that his guess was exactly right. She begins to talk about how 
she used to go with her late fiancé and discusses how her fiancé had been 
the kindest, gentlest soul she had ever seen. He then decides that what she 
needs is someone kind and gentle. Ned is constantly feeding off of the cues 
that Talia is giving, putting together the perfect picture of what she seems to 
want and need. He appears to be sensitive and interested in listening, 
despite the fact that he does not actually care about her or what she is 
saying—he pays only enough attention to make sure that he has enough 


information to use later on. 


Effectively, then, Ned will create a persona—a sort of mast that he uses to 


present himself to Talia, over the course of the introduction and interaction. 


He figures out what she wants, becomes that person, and executes it 
perfectly. He will wear this mask for a while—he wants her to become 


attracted to him and be interested in more. 


Love Bombing and the Narcissist 


With Talia officially hooked, Ned moves on to his next tactic—love 
bombing. This works entirely by Ned showering her with the lavish praise 
and attention that has been discussed as being too good to be true—because 
it is. He is doing this for a very specific reason. People are quite motivated 
by very specific factors in life, and one such factor is whether they have 
created a positive association between whatever it is that has their attention 
and what they will be doing. In this case, Ned wants Talia to put together a 
positive association with spending time with him. He wants her to feel like 
he is the greatest person ever, and he will do whatever he can in order to 


continue to win her over. 


With the constant showering of praise, pushing the relationship to move 
quicker, and the façade of being the perfect man for her, he is able to 
effectively convince her to fall in love. All it took was a few gifts, plenty of 
kind words, and learning a bit about her. At this point, he wants to facilitate 
her to fall in love with her as quickly as possible, and he will continue to 


ride on the honeymoon period for a while. 


After some time, though, as the newness of the intense relationship begins 
to fade away, he begins to let his mask slip a bit. He stops being perfect for 
her all the time—after all, he believes that his true self is perfect. He may 
even use what is known as devaluing—he will effectively suddenly and 
unexpectedly knock her off of the pedestal she has become accustomed to. 
In knocking her off, she will effectively be left to scramble desperately to 
reclaim her position. She will try as hard as she can to get back to that spot, 


meaning she will do anything that he asks in order to regain favor. 


This is because the good feelings of the love bomb stage are intoxicating. 
They feel good and addictive, and as soon as you no longer have them, you 
desperately crave them once more. You will do whatever you can in order 
to reclaim that love and attention, as Talia has done. As soon as she does 
win his favor back, she feels more comfortable in her position again. 
However, Ned will repeat this cycle over and over again at varying lengths, 
all because he wants to make her feel unstable. In feeling unstable, she 
cannot accurately predict what will happen next. She will constantly be 
scrambling to remain on his good side, meaning that he has someone that is 


always at attention to give him whatever it is that he wants at that moment. 


Love bombing 


Victim scranblesto 
get back to Status 
quo 


Stable love and 
affection 


Beginning to grow 
indifferent 


Devaluing event 


Gaslighting and the Narcissist 


Beyond the cycle of convincing someone to fall in love with him, however, 
Ned has all sorts of other tactics up his sleeve. One such tactic is gaslighting 
—when you use gaslighting, you are effectively convincing the other 
person that they are insane. This is particularly heinous when used by the 


narcissist for one reason: He believes his gaslighting wholeheartedly. 


Most of the time, the manipulator will intentionally gaslight, knowing that it 
is a lie because that lie will serve a purpose that is important. It is important 
to go through the effort because it is seen as necessary. However, the 
narcissist gaslights for a slightly different reason—his narrative is simply 
that distorted. Unlike the manipulator, the narcissist’s perception of reality 
is skewed—he believes that he is the best person around. He believes that 
he is absolutely entitled to anything that he asks for or strives to achieve. He 
believes that he does deserve to be recognized as superior. However, as the 


normal person looking in knows, these are nothing but delusions. 


These delusions are incredibly powerful, however, and the narcissist 
believes them wholeheartedly. When he uses gaslighting, then reciting his 
narrative of what he believes has happened, he believes what he is saying. 
He believes that he is the victim because that distorted belief is better than 
the alternative, which would have been to acknowledge that he is not as 
perfect as he attempts to be. If he were to admit that, he would let go of 
everything integral to who he is, so instead, he convinces himself that his 
narrative is the right narrative. Of course, that then means that the narrative 


that everyone else gets is just as skewed. 


However, the narcissist’s narrative is harder to discern from the truth. With 
manipulators, you can usually pick up on signs of deception, but with the 
narcissist, they believe what they are saying. That makes this dangerous— 
they may entirely believe that the person that got the promotion did so in 
order to get back at the narcissist. They may believe that the person that 
broke up with them did it so they could sleep around and hurt the narcissist 
—so long as the narcissist is the victim within the gaslighting, the narcissist 


will continue to sing that narrative. 


Projection and the Narcissist 


As a sort of contrast to the act of mirroring, narcissists are also adept at 
projection as well. They will take their own traits and assign them to other 
people in accordance to whether they want to scapegoat out the other 
person or make them favored. In particular, you see this sort of behavioral 
tactic play out with narcissistic parents toward their children—the favored 
child will be referred to as the golden child for this section, and is the child 
that can do no wrong. The narcissist usually identifies very closely with the 
golden child and will allow the golden child to do anything. They see the 


golden child as the extension of all things good about themselves. 


The scapegoated child, however, is given all of the negatives. If the 
narcissist believes that he is, for example, someone with low self-esteem, 
which some narcissists are, the scapegoat will be treated as a sort of effigy 
for all of that negativity. The narcissist will funnel all negativity about 


himself onto the scapegoat and take it out on him or her. 


If the scapegoat wants to have friends over, he is punished. If he wants new 
clothes, he is given hand-me-downs while his younger brother gets to go 
out and shop at the name-brand stores. The scapegoat is effectively 
victimized and taught to take the abuse. If anything goes wrong, it is always 


the scapegoat’s fault, with no exceptions. 


This, of course, is an incredibly damaging dynamic. The golden child never 
learns consequences and usually winds up being quite narcissistic himself, 
while the scapegoat instead gets attacked with all of the negativity and 


taught to be quite codependent instead, as her needs are never met, and she 


is taught that she must always please the narcissist and the golden child. 
The scapegoat will be begging for any scraps of affection and kindness, 
which are only occasionally shown when the scapegoat has put the 


narcissist’s needs first. 


DARVO and the Narcissist 


The final tactic that we will discuss with the narcissist is his skilled ability 
to reverse nearly any argument or problem. Even if he is the attacker, he 
will find a way to spin things around if you are not familiar with his method 
known as DARVO. 


+f; ery: 


Standing for Deny, Attack, Reverse Victim, and Offender, DARVO is an 
incredibly powerful technique. If you do not know what you are looking 
for, it is next to impossible to accurately notice and evade. You need to be 
able to recognize that the narcissist is intentionally trying to derail the 


argument instead of actually making a good point. 


For example, let’s go back to Ned and Talia. Talia is crying because she 
feels like she was taken advantage of. She tells Ned that she is furious and 
that she wishes he had never bothered coming around because she would 
much rather have been able to grieve the loss of her fiancé without his 


negative presence. 


Ned, then, points out that she has always held her fiancé over his head and 
that she has always made him so incredibly pressured to try to live up to 
this dead man’s idealized image. He points out how difficult it is to win out 
over a man that is dead, gone, and will only ever be remembered fondly, 


and in response, he points out how she is even doing it right now. 


Let’s pause for a moment and consider what just happened—did Talia ever 
actually say anything about Ned not being good enough? No—she said that 
she wished that she had never put up with such a negative presence. She 
never compared the two and instead only made it a point to mention that 
she would have rather been able to avoid Ned and all of the narcissistic 
toxicity that he brought with him. However, Ned was able to spin it around, 


and suddenly, he was the poor victim that needed sympathy. 


He was the one who was made to feel not good enough, in his narrative. He 
was the one held to an impossible standard. Notice how he effectively 
flipped the narrative, all by denying what Talia had first said, then attacking 


her to put her on the defensive. 


With Talia on the defensive, she is going to be so busy attempting to protect 
herself that he is able to get away with the argument. He has completely 
distracted her from her initial anger and instead put her on guard, meaning 


he now has the complete advantage. 


This is the power of DARVO— it is an important tactic to remember 
because if you can identify it when it happens, you can effectively stop it 
from occurring. All you need to do is refuse to give in to the attempt to 
attack and reverse—for example, instead of taking the bait, Talia may 
mention that Ned’s description of things never happened and that his own 
feelings on what she was discussing are entirely irrelevant at that point in 
time as she was addressing something unrelated to her fiancé. She simply 
wanted to be given the freedom to grieve without interruption, and she felt 
like Ned had stolen that chance from her. 


Chapter 7: The Effects of Narcissistic Abuse 


Now, you have seen a bit about what the narcissist can do if they are given 
the in. You have seen how they are able to manipulate with ease, and how 
they have several tactics that can make them particularly dangerous when 
interacting with other people. However, so far, other than looking at a few 
of the signs of abuse within relationships, what has not been addressed and 


truly discussed is the impact that the abuse of the narcissist can really cause. 


Narcissistic abuse is different from traditional emotional abuse—that much 
has become glaringly obvious. However, the abuse that the narcissist uses 
seems to leave far deeper emotional scars. Perhaps related to the fact that 
the narcissist is able to betray the most sensitive, intimate parts of you— 
your heart. More often than not, the narcissist is able to convince you to 
believe in the existence of someone who never existed, convincing you to 
fall in love with someone who was little more than a figment of the 


narcissist’s imagination. 


Talia was so angry, not because of Ned himself, or because Ned was not 
good enough, but rather because Ned had lied. Ned had made her fall for 
someone that she thought would bring her happiness, and he did, for a short 
while. Of course, that happiness very quickly was destroyed altogether, 


leaving Talia reeling as she tried to cope with the sudden realization. 


Ultimately, some of the effects of narcissistic abuse can be worse in some 
ways than the abuse of emotional abusers, particularly because of the 
betrayal and demand for utter obedience from the narcissist. Within this 


chapter, we will go over five of the potential side effects of narcissistic 


abuse that many people in recovery must go through. We will take a look at 
echoism, the impact of narcissism on self-confidence, the development of a 
codependent personality, common mental health issues that arise, and 
finally, post-traumatic stress disorder, a very serious, very debilitating form 


of anxiety. 


As you read through this chapter after having come from an abusive 
relationship, do not be afraid, and do not let your feelings get the best of 
you—remember, you are going to be learning how to overcome these side 
effects. You are well on your way to healing if you have taken the effort to 
read this far into this book, and you will be able to succeed in healing. 
However, you must be aware of your injuries before you can treat them. As 
painful as it can be to stop and look at all of the ways that the narcissist in 
your life has hurt you, whether through damaging your self-confidence, 
causing anxiety, or leading to echoism, you can heal. You can reclaim your 
life. Repeat that to yourself—you can and WILL reclaim your life, one step 


and one day at a time. 


Echoism 


The first significant impact that we will look at is echoism. If you are 
familiar with the myth of Narcissus, you know that a young nymph named 
Echo had fallen in love with Narcissus. He rejected her, and she faded 
away. Appalled at the rejection, Narcissus was punished, cursed to stare 
into a puddle of water at his reflection until he, too, died. All that remained 
of Echo after the rejection was her voice, a mere shadow of who she once 


was before Narcissus refused her. 


When we are talking about echoism with humans, then we are looking at 
how people tend to respond to narcissists and the abuse of narcissists. In 
particular, echoism is a trait—this trait, in particular, measuring as a fear of 
becoming a narcissist. The echoists, then, are afraid of their own needs. 
They are kind, but terrified by the possibility of burdening those around 
them. They wish to support others without acknowledgment and praise, 
preferring instead to remain in the background and blending in. They 
usually struggle with praise and attention, feeling like they cannot voice 


what they want, even if they know whatever that is. 


The echoist, then, is like the anti-narcissist. While the narcissist needs 
attention, the echoist fears it. While the narcissist thrives on control and 
determining what will happen, the echoist would rather be told what to do. 
When the narcissist becomes abusive, the echoists blame themselves for the 


problem. 


Ultimately, then, the echoist is able to help other people meet their own 
needs, but struggles to ever acknowledge and meet their own. They are 


constantly hiding in the backdrop. While of course, some people have this 


personality type naturally, even without ever suffering at the hand of an 
abuser or narcissist, others develop it seemingly from their abuse. They 
grew aversive to needing their needs met, learning that any attention is 
uncomfortable because it means that the narcissist will be turning his 
greedy, jealous eyes on them soon after. It becomes easier when your life is 
overshadowed by a narcissist, to simply let it all pass you by while you hide 
in the background. Praise then gets dismissed as luck or saying that it was 
just really easy. However, anything negative is automatically the fault of the 


echoist. 


Typically, after so long of being made inferior and taught to help the 
narcissist rather than take care of themselves, the echoists become willing 
to just do exactly that. Similar to the codependent, they feel like their only 
purpose in life is to make sure that everyone else is cared for, and in doing 
so, they struggle. As needs pile up, completely unmet, they grow 


unhealthier. They find themselves miserable, and they often feel stuck. 


If you are afraid that you may be an echoist, do not fret—just as with all of 
the other negative aspects of discovering that you have been a victim of a 


narcissist, you can heal this one as well. 


Losing Self-Confidence 


Another common side effect of a relationship with a narcissist is the loss of 
self-confidence. Even the most confident person in the world will 
eventually be worn down around the narcissist without the proper 
protection, so if you happened to find that the narcissist destroyed what was 
once a confident individual, you are not alone. The narcissist’s tactics 
usually sneak by completely unnoticed unless you take the time to learn 


them, and if not, you may find your own self-confidence waning. 


Self-confidence is critical for people—it is how you learn to trust yourself 
to take care of yourself. When you are self-confident, you trust that you are 
capable of doing the right thing, and you inherently trust your own 
decisions and judgments. You are certain that you will always be behaving 


in ways that are beneficial to you and you trust that you will be successful. 


Self-confidence is not the same as grandiosity in the sense that the narcissist 
is grandiose—self-confidence is usually healthy. It is good to be self- 


confident, so long as your self-confidence is accurate and warranted, taking 


time to acknowledge that you do, like everyone else around you, have 


certain weaknesses that must be accommodated for. 


Because the narcissist is so quick to tell people that they are less than the 
narcissist in any way possible, always downplaying any achievements, it is 
only natural that over time, that self-confidence would wane. After hearing 
the narcissist tell you that you are stupid enough times, you will naturally 
internalize it, simply because people tend to be more susceptible to beliefs 
that they hear on repeat over and over again. The narcissist’s abuse 
eventually does this to your self-confidence overall, leaving you a shell of 


your former glory. 


Becoming Codependent 


Codependency has already been touched upon within this book so far, and it 
will be addressed once more in a bit more depth here, as it is an important 
consequence of narcissistic abuse in several situations. When you are 
exposed to a narcissist, you are commonly given two choices: Give in or be 
abused. The narcissist will attempt to browbeat almost anyone into 
submission, and in the event that submission is impossible, the narcissist 
then rejects the other person under the guise of having wanted to do that all 


along. 


When you are browbeaten into submission threatened with being forced 
into submission, you very quickly learn to fear the narcissist. Especially if 
you were a child that grew up under a narcissistic parent, you may find that 
any time you had needs, they were always overshadowed and rejected 
altogether. You were not allowed to have needs without punishment, or 


having those needs barely met at all. 


Codependency eventually develops then when someone has been forced to 
give up their own needs in favor of other people’s over and over again on 
repeat until they no longer tried to meet those needs anymore. For example, 
imagine that you grew up with a narcissistic father and a codependent 
mother. You were likely constantly taught from a young age to put your 
father’s needs first. Your mother would feed your father first—specifically 
what he wanted. If you were crying because you had gotten hurt, but your 
father was going off on some tirade about something, your mother would 


attend to him. It was even so bad that the time that you fell and broke your 


arm, your mom stopped and fetched your father his dinner and beer before 


helping you, despite the fact that you were crying in pain. 


This sort of constant neglect eventually taught you that trying to meet your 
needs was pointless—they would never have been met anyway. You would 
not be able to get them met no matter how hard you tried, and the message 
that you internalized early on was not to have needs. They did not get met, 
so why bother wasting time thinking about them? You may have learned to 
forget about your hunger or thirst, until you would stand up and get dizzy, 
realizing that you had not eaten or had any water in a while. You would 
frequently forget to make sure that you dressed appropriately or that you 
were prepared for events and outings simply because you never had to 


bother with your own needs. 


Growing up or being forced into the shadow of a narcissist will cause 
people to become incredibly codependent. They will find that their self- 
esteem drops, something closely related to the drop in self-confidence. 
They will become people-pleasing, feeling like they must take care of 
everyone else without complaint. They will struggle to create any sort of 
boundaries at all in relationships, believing that they are unimportant or 
should not be enforced. They identify closely with the caretaker, meaning 
that they must constantly be engaging with other people and taking care of 
them to find any real value in their lives. They must maintain some sort of 
control, whether on their own behaviors or feeling like they are in control of 
the narcissist, usually in the form of taking the blame for everything that 
happens. They are dependent upon the relationships that they are in, 
terrified of being rejected, and they will obsess over their relationships and 


the anxiety surrounding being rejected. 


Ultimately, the codependent becomes someone hardly capable of 
functioning in a healthy capacity in real relationships. Because the 
codependent is so set upon making sure that all needs are met without fail 
and making sure that they take the blame for any behavioral issues within 
the relationship, there is always an unhealthy dynamic in a codependent’s 


relationships, and for that reason alone, codependency must be defeated. 


Mental Health Issues 


Ultimately, narcissistic abuse causes mental health issues, as well. Aside 
from echoism and codependency, you can see very real, diagnosable 
disorders as well. The victims of abuse may go on to suffer from 
depression, and with that depression, they often feel like they will never be 
able to get out. The narcissistic relationship can be a constant drain on any 
healthy thoughts or hope within the individual, eventually resulting entirely 
in depression. The depression can be long-lasting and pervasive as the 
victim finds themselves isolated, alone, and abused on a regular basis. 
Rather than being able to escape, they are stuck, alone, and with nothing but 


abuse to show for it. 


Anxiety is another common mental health issue that arises. The victim may 
find themselves feeling anxious at just the thought of the narcissist, or the 
displeasure that they are certain will be problematic in the future. They 
know that the narcissist is abusive and they fear that abuse. However, they 
also find themselves powerless to stop it. Instead, they find themselves 


constantly living in a state of heightened stress. 


Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 


Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a very specific side effect to the 
abuse that the narcissist tries to dish out. Those suffering from PTSD often 
struggle in life—even little things that are vaguely reminiscent of the 
narcissist can be enough to trigger the victim to find themselves in the midst 
of a panic attack, and that is something that no person wants to have to 


endure. 


Post-traumatic stress disorder arises from the mind trying to cope with 
trauma. The exact cause is not yet known, though psychologists are leaning 
toward it being related to the brain’s ability to process memories. If the 
brain of the individual with PTSD is unable to properly process the 
memories, it is quite likely that the individual will then suffer further from 
the negative side effects. They will have recurring nightmares about the 
abuse or about the narcissist, or they will find that they are largely unable to 
protect themselves from any flashbacks that may arise in response to 


triggering stimuli. 


If you find that you are suffering from PTSD, you are going to want to 
speak to a doctor or other licensed medical professional. There is only so 
much advice that can be given through a book without being able to directly 
speak to the individual suffering from symptoms, so the best thing that you 
can do is to get a diagnosis from a proper medical professional and begin 


treatment with therapy and possibly medication. 


While you can attempt to treat the symptoms of PTSD at home, the 


management without guidance is not always effective. It can help, but if 


you want to truly find relief, you are going to want to make sure that you 
have that guidance and personalized advice that you can only get in a one- 


on-one interaction. 


Chapter 8: Disarming the Narcissist 


Narcissists are notoriously difficult to get rid of, even if you try. More often 
than not, if you want to get the narcissist to go away, you need to figure out 
how to do it in a way that makes them think that going away was their idea 
altogether. You want them to believe that they were in control, so they do 
not take your attempt to avoid them as a way of subverting their perceived 
control over the situation. Remember, the narcissist is convinced 
wholeheartedly that he or she is entirely responsible for everything. They 
believe that they control everyone around them, struggling to see anyone 


else as a legitimate human being deserving of respect or care. 


When you find yourself stuck interacting with a narcissist and trying to get 
rid of them, or at the very least, removing their ability to hurt you, there are 
several tactics that you can use that have not yet been discussed within the 
scope of this book. You can make it a point to cut off the narcissist and 
disappear completely, potentially moving somewhere that the narcissist will 
never be able to find you, but that is not always practical or possible. For 
that reason, this chapter will guide you through five ways to remove power 


from the narcissist. 


Of course, the most effective way to disarm the narcissist is to avoid contact 
completely, and this will be the first topic discussed. Depending on the 
relationships with the narcissist, you may be in a position in which you can 
cut them off altogether, and allow yourself the space you need. Beyond that, 
there are techniques such as being able to set up a boundary that is 
enforced, or becoming what is commonly called the “grey rock” in order to 


make the narcissist think that you are boring. 


What is consistent no matter what the method you choose, however, is to 
make sure that you are firm in whatever you choose. If you cut off, you 
must stay cut off. If you are willing to take advantage of boundaries, you 
must always enforce them and the consequences of not respecting those 
boundaries. If you are to relent on your attempts to manage the narcissist, 
even just slightly, you will encourage the narcissist—the narcissist will be 
aware of the discovered weakness, and that means that the narcissist will be 
able to take advantage in the future, as well as encourage future attempts as 


well. 


As you read through these methods, keep in mind that you will want to 
make sure that whatever you choose works for you. Narcissists are not a 
one-size-fits-all situation, and you will have to figure out exactly how will 
work best for the narcissist in your life. Some are relatively trainable—with 
some reinforcement and constant use of boundaries, you may be able to 
maintain some sort of a distant relationship with them. In other instances, 


you may be best served by cutting your losses and moving on. 


Cut Off Contact Completely 


The first tactic is by far the most effective, but it is not always practical. If 
you are able to cut off the narcissist, please do so. You will find that, after 
the initial extinction burst, life becomes far more peaceful. You will be so 
much happier without the narcissist controlling your life and making it 
impossible for you to find enjoyment in anything. 

If you will be cutting off the narcissist completely, you can do so by stating 
your boundary, such as saying that you are no longer interested in a 
relationship and asking that the narcissist does not contact you again. From 
there, you simply ignore any attempts to contact you. If they show up to 
your house, you can call the police and have them told to leave or risk 
trespassing charges. If you find that they are particularly persistent, you can 
always try moving, changing your number, and moving on, especially if 
they live rather close to you. If they are long-distance, just blocking 
numbers may be enough, though they may try to show up again at some 


point in the future. 


When you are cutting off a narcissist, you are likely to be met with 
resistance—after all, the narcissist will not be ignored on anyone else’s 
terms, or at least that is what he thinks. You may receive phone calls from 
family members, asking how you could be so cruel as to cut off poor 
Grandpa Frank, never mind the fact that he has been abusive for the last 
several years. What matters here more than anything, however, is that you 


must remain firm. 


If you ever give in to the demand for contact, you have rewarded the 


narcissist. You have taught the narcissist that if they push you exactly that 


much, they can get you to relent, and they will use that tactic again in the 
future. Just as a toddler throwing a temper tantrum should never be 


rewarded, you want to keep your distance from the narcissist as well. 


Keep in mind that if you cut off, you are going to expect what is known as 
an extinction burst—this is essentially how the narcissist will behave in 
response to the fact that you have suddenly stopped rewarding his attempts 
to control you, as you always have. You are suddenly working in a way that 
is not normal, and that does not compute to his mind. Think of how if you 
were to go outside, only to find that your car did not start, you would try 
again and again, growing increasingly more frantic for a few minutes as you 
desperately tried to crank the car. After a few minutes, you would probably 
give up and call the mechanic. However, the narcissist will not—he will 
repeatedly crank and crank and crank until something gives. Remember, the 
narcissist is rarely able to see the world rationally and is more likely to be 


guided by his own skewed and distorted worldview than anything else. 


In this case, however, your obedience and attention would be what he was 
seeking instead of a car starting, and he will try over and over again. In 
particular, you will see the demands ramp up exponentially over a short 
period of time, and it is imperative that you do not ever give in—if you give 
in during this time, it will be far more difficult in the future. Let the 
extinction burst die out. It will be rough for a short while, but after you 
make it clear that you will not respond, there is a good chance that the 
narcissist will simply declare that they did not like you and that they cut 


you off, and he will be on his way. 


Become the Grey Rock 


Another technique that is a bit more realistic if you cannot cut off for some 
reason, such as if you share children with a narcissistic ex, is to become the 
grey rock. Think about the last time you took a walk outside. Maybe you 
went through your yard, or maybe you went hiking. Can you remember any 


of the rocks you saw? 


Chances are, you cannot. And this is normal. The rocks are so mundane and 
irrelevant to your daily life that you have no reason to focus on them in the 
first place. Looking at the rocks does not matter to you because they are 


boring, and you do not commit any of them to memory. 


You want to channel that with the narcissist. If you can channel the 
boringness and mundaneness of that rock, you can bore the narcissist out of 
bothering with you in the future. All you need to do is ensure that you are as 


plain as possible in any and all interactions with them. 


Let’s say that you have children with your ex, and this is why you cannot 
simply cut them off. If he asks you how you are doing, you would simply 
ignore the question. If he asks you about the children, you answer shortly 
and with as little detail as possible. If he has any demands for you, instead 
of arguing about how they are ridiculous, you can say, “Okay.” And leave it 


at that if you are going to give in, or ignore them if they are not acceptable. 


Just as with the cut off method, you will find that the narcissist will ramp up 
in an attempt to get you to reply, but keep on ignoring it. You do not need to 


acknowledge anything irrelevant to children or other shared endeavors. This 


means that anything that does not require a response will not get one, and 
over time, the narcissist will get bored with being ignored. There is little to 


gain out of being entirely ignored, and the narcissist knows that. 


In the end, the narcissist will likely lose interest and leave you alone, just as 
with the cut off method. 


Take Advantage of Time 


Another common method that you can use, preferably in conjunction with 
the grey rock method, is to learn how to use time to your advantage. The 
narcissist is likely used to you jumping any time he asks you to. This means 
that he absolutely expects that behavior to continue. He will assume that 
you will jump any time he send that message to you. If he asks you for help, 


he assumes that you will drop everything and come to his aid. 


What you can do to eliminate that particular assumption is make sure that 
you actively end it. Set the narcissist to silent on your phone if you can so 
his messages do not bother you as they all come flying in, and do not 
respond. You should set some arbitrary amount of time to get back to him, 
if at all, simply because there is no reason for you to respond at his beck 
and call. If you are busy, then you are busy, and your phone is for your own 


convenience, not for the convenience of those around you. 


Start by pushing out your responses for a few hours for a while. Maybe 
decide that you will wait to read the narcissist’s messages for an hour after 
they arrive, and then enforce another hour during which you are debating 
how best to approach your response. This means that there would be a bare 
minimum of two hours between noticing the message and responding if you 


felt it warranted a response. 


This will be difficult at first, especially if you have been trained to respond 
to the narcissist any time he asks you to do something. You will find it hard 
to overcome that programming that makes you feel like you have no choice 


but to immediately reply. However, that is exactly what the narcissist wants, 


and you need to figure out how best to overcome it once and for all. 
Overcoming it is possible if you put in the effort, and while it will be 


uncomfortable, it will be well worth it. 


Over time, you will destroy that expectation that the narcissist has that you 
will be readily available at any moment if the narcissist determines that you 
should be. You will find that the narcissist will message you less and less, 


and that is absolutely okay with you. 


Create and Enforce Boundaries 


When you are in a healthy relationship, boundaries are expected. If you are 
going to be enforcing boundaries, you want to ensure that you are setting 
ones that are meaningful for you. Your boundaries are basically the laws for 
respect for yourself—they are the line you draw that marks behaviors that 


you will not tolerate. 


For example, a very common boundary that goes unspoken in most 
relationships is that there will be no physical violence. This means that both 
parties are well aware of the fact that everyone expects a complete lack of 
physical violence within the relationship, and both parties are willing to 


recognize and follow that boundary 


Narcissists are not fond of boundaries for good reason—they stand in the 
narcissist’s way. When the narcissist wants to control someone, they cannot 
exactly manage that if someone has a boundary specifically about wanting 
to be free to make decisions on his own. The narcissist then sees that 
boundary as a sort of challenge—the narcissist wants to take it down and 
prove that it does not matter. After all, the narcissist is special, remember? 
He believes that he is deserving of the honor of being able to stomp all over 


it without consequence simply because of his uniqueness and superiority. 


Of course, that is not the case. You absolutely can and should set 
boundaries, no matter what the narcissist says, and if anyone tries to 
completely steamroll those boundaries, then you know that they are not safe 
or respectful people to have in your life. If they are going to willingly throw 


away your boundaries without regard for how you feel, you cannot trust 


them at all, and that is a problem. You should be able to trust the people in 


your life. 


When you do set a boundary, you should make sure that you state that 
boundary explicitly to the narcissist, as well as pair it with a consequence. 
For example, you could tell the narcissist, “If you are going to continue to 
belittle me, I will end this visit until you are willing to talk to me like a 
respectful adult. The next time that he belittles you, and he will belittle you 
again to test that boundary, you must end the visit. You can simply stand up, 
pack your belongings, acknowledge that you are not okay with that 
behavior, and leave, telling him that you can try again when he is ready to 


be respectful. 


Most likely, he will whine and throw a fit about how you are so cruel for 
punishing him for his misbehavior, but think about it this way—you are not 
punishing him, you are protecting yourself. You are setting a reasonable 
boundary—to not be called names or belittled, and it is not punishment for 
the name-caller for you to put distance between them and yourself. Would 
you call it punishing the snake if you refused to touch it because you knew 


that it would bit you? No—it is protecting yourself. 


You can try the interaction again after whatever period of time that you said 
would happen between the next disregard of boundaries, reiterating the 
boundary that you have for yourself and the consequence to ignoring it. The 
trick here is that you must follow through every time you put out a 
consequence. You need to be able to tell the narcissist that you will honor 
your own boundaries to protect yourself, whether he likes it or not, and do 


so to protect yourself. His comfort is not your responsibility, and if he really 


wanted to continue with the visit, he would not have caused you so many 


problems or ignored your very reasonable boundaries. 


Create Some Distance 


Sometimes, the best approach to a relationship with a narcissist is to create 
a slow fade away from how often you contact them. Effectively, you will 
slowly take more and more time to contact them in between normal 
intervals, stretching out the time between the frequency of contact when 


you begin and where you would like to be. 


For example, imagine that you have a narcissistic father. You love your 
father, but he is incredibly exhausting to deal with. Presently, he tries to call 
you every day at least twice, and you are finding that it is putting a huge 
strain on your own daily life. After all, you have your own life and children, 
and while you can understand a father wanting to communicate with his 
grown child, you also know that you are too busy for two hour-long 
conversations out of your day, amounting to a whopping 13% of your 
waking hours. That is time that you could spend with your children, tending 
to yourself, keeping up with housework, or just sitting and enjoying the 
silence. After all, between work, school for the children, housework, 
homework, and making sure that everyone is ready for the next day, you 


feel like you only ever have a few minutes of peace to yourself. 


In this instance, you could make it a point to create some distance slowly 
with your narcissistic father. You would slowly stretch out how often you 
reply or get back to him. Perhaps you start by ignoring that first phone call 
every couple days—that is already significant and gets you a few hours of 
your time back per week. From there, you may decide to let your father 
know that you are busy when he calls and that you will give him a call over 


the weekend when things are less stressful. 


Over time, you would go from two phone calls a day, to a phone call every 
few days, to eventually once every week or two. This process takes time 
and patience, but eventually, you are able to stretch out the visits. Expect 
some pushback, as with all other narcissistic strategies, as the narcissist 
hates change that is not on his own terms. The fact that you are changing 
his schedule and expectations is a huge slight to him, and he will not be 


happy about it or respecting it, despite the fact that it is in your best interest. 


Chapter 9: Leaving the Abusive Relationship 


At this point, you may realize that your relationship is ruined. It is damaged 
beyond repair, and you know that you need out. However, leaving is always 
easier said than done, and especially if you cohabit and share children, all 
sorts of legalities must also be considered in order to safely exit without 
trouble. After all of the insight that you have gained through reading this 
book so far, you may now recognize that the abuse in your relationship is 
not going anywhere—it is there to stay. That is terrifying for most people 
and not something that you necessarily want to put up with. However, that 
is exactly why this guide exists. You can leave. This chapter will tell you 
how to leave, detailing what you should prepare. You can free yourself from 
the abuser’s grasp once and for all, breaking those chains and freeing 
yourself from the life of torment and abuse that you otherwise would have 


to endure. 


When you are sure that you are ready to leave, remember three things: Your 
partner will not change. You cannot help your partner to change. Your 
partner will promise and beg to keep you, but this is because he does not 
want to lose control. Ultimately, he is not ever going to put in the long-term 
effort to change, especially if he is a narcissist because the narcissistic 
personality disorder that he suffers from prevents him from ever 
acknowledging that he is the problem in the first place. This means that he 
is going to remain the abusive person that he is, no matter how much you 
may want him to change. That is not your fault, and it is okay to grieve for 
that relationship that you have lost. However, do not let that grief hold you 


back from breaking those chains and finding freedom and health. 


Get Your Ducks in a Row 


As cute as this imagery may be, getting your ducks in a row is your ability 
to get everything in line and ready to go. You are going to be actively trying 
to make sure that everything that you will need in your exit is in one place 


and prepared. 


This stage will involve anything legal that you may need to do. Do you 
share children? Start looking into custody and what you will need to do to 
file for emergency custody. It is possible that if you have documentation to 
prove abuse, that you can get emergency custody of your children. In some 
states, if you are unwed as a mother, you retain full custody, even if your 
child’s father is on the birth certificate. Make sure that you consult a lawyer 
to double-check on the legality of these things and ensure that you do not 


make any missteps that will damage your fight for custody. 


You will also want to make sure that all-important documentation is lined 
up. Do you know where your legal paperwork is? Do you have your social 
security card and birth certificate? How about all paperwork for the car, 
insurance, joint property, and anything else relevant to you? Make sure that 
you gather up all important legal documents as well as making sure that you 
gather anything for your children as well. You want to make sure that you 
have the paperwork declaring custody if it is already worked out. If you are 
going to be filing for a restraining order and emergency custody, get all of 


that as well. 


With the paperwork lined up, you need to make sure that you also have all 
of your sentimental, irreplaceable items in one place that is easy to grab. 


Make sure that you have computers, hard drives, photo albums, and 


anything else that you would be devastated to lose if the narcissist decides 
to get destructive to punish you for leaving. You will want to put this all ina 
bag that you can carry out quickly, placing it with all of the legal 
paperwork. These are your go-bags—they are there for you to take and 


leave as quickly as possible if the need should arise. 


Make sure that the go-bag also has chargers—you want to have a spare set 
of car keys, some money, your phone and computer charger, anything that 
you will need for children if you do not have time to stop and gather things 
otherwise, and anything else that you know that you would need for a trip 
that is a few nights long. 


Remember, ultimately, your physical belongings can be replaced, and while 
you should put in the effort to protect your belongings if you can, if you 
cannot, do not bother. Focus on making sure you and your children and pets 


are out if you can. 


Ducksin a Row Checklist 


* All legal paperwork 

* Birth certificate/SSNs 

* Mortgages/leases 

* Car ownership papers 

* Bank information 

* Marriage paperwork 

* Insurance information 

* Diplomas/proof of education 

* Any important or sentimental 
items 

* Cell phone charger 

. Keys 

* Money 


Create a Safety Plan 


Leaving the relationship is perhaps the most dangerous time in an abusive 
relationship, and because of that, you need to have a safety plan in place. 
Think of this as a contingency plan just in case anything goes wrong—you 


never want to use it, but you want it to be there just in case. 


This safety plan should involve you identifying several safe areas in your 
home, as well as the best paths to get there. You will want to make sure that, 
if you notice that your abuser is starting to escalate, you can make sure that 
you are not trapped .This means that you should avoid areas with small 
spaces or that can have you blocked in regularly. You will also want to 
make sure that you avoid a room such as a kitchen, which is full of all sorts 


of easily weaponized items. 


Include your children in the safety plan as well—as much as you may be 
hoping that they are protected from the abuse, they most likely know that it 
is happening. Have a code word that you use to tell your children to get to 
your side or get to a safe spot immediately and without argument. In 
particular, you will want to make sure that you practice this several times, 
such as turning it into a game. Maybe your code word is “Sticky Tape!” and 
as soon as your children hear it, they all must run to touch you as soon as 
possible and stick to you like tape. This is a good way to remove some of 


the fear while still having it readily remembered for your children. 


Create an Escape Plan 


Now, with your ducks in a row, your belongings ready, and your children 
and yourself prepared with a safety plan, it is time to put together your 
escape plan. The safest may be to attempt to leave when your abuser is not 
present at home, such as during the workday, if at all possible. If not, you 
can try in the middle of the night. If your partner is home, you are always 
welcome to call for a police escort to get yourself and your children out of 


the home safely and without incident. 


Make sure that your escape plan involves where you will go, how you will 
get there, and how you will protect yourself. Can you go to stay with family 
that will help keep you safe while you stabilize? If not, consider a domestic 
violence shelter, as those ware well-protected and can keep you and your 


children safe during this dangerous time. 


When it is time, make sure that you do not hesitate—go as soon as you said 
that you would to protect yourself and your children and remember that you 


are doing the right thing. 


This is not an easy process—leaving is never easy, especially if you do not 
have any money on you or access to the money. However, be proud that you 
are not willing to let yourself be held down, unable to live your life in peace 
and safety. You are choosing to move forward toward safety and happiness, 


and that is quite noble on its own. 


When you are ready to escape, keep in mind that your technology can be 


your worst enemy here—if you are trying to leave, you need to ensure that 


your abuser cannot possibly track you. If you have a smartphone, consider 
leaving it behind and buying a new burner phone if you can get away with 
it. Make sure that you log out of all iterations of family tracking and GPS 
monitoring that may exist on your phones, tablets, and computers. Beyond 
that, you will want to ensure that you change your passwords on all 
accounts as well, so your abuser cannot log in and track you or who you are 
talking to. 


The Aftermath 


Right after you have left, it is critical that you make sure that your 
information is kept as private as possible. You will want to make sure that 
you use a burner phone or a new phone number, which you specifically 
want to remain unlisted. You do not want anyone being able to track your 


number to your name. 


While most of the time, when you are moving, you make it a point to fill 
out a forwarding address with the post office to ensure that you get all of 
your mail, consider having it all forwarded to a PO box instead. This will 
mean that the only notification that your ex may be able to get is that you 


are using a PO box in a certain area. 


As you are setting up your new life, you will want to make sure that you 
disconnect from any and all bank or credit accounts that are shared—make 
sure that you speak to a lawyer about ownership beforehand if possible, as 
that can change from state to state, depending upon marital status and 
several other factors as well. You will absolutely want to avoid using any 
cards that your ex has access to, as your ex will be able to see where you 
are making transactions, and that can be enough information to piece 
together a general idea of where you are, something that you likely want to 


avoid. 


If you do happen to remain in the same city or town due to jobs, school, or 
other obligations, change up your routine. If you have children in school 
and daycare, you may want to consider reenrolling them elsewhere, as your 


ex, assuming he is their father, would likely be able to pick them up without 


any protest if they wanted to. Changing up as much of your routine will 
help you avoid being easily tracked. Keep in mind that your charged cell 
phone should be on your person at all times, and you should never hesitate 


to call for help if you need it. 


Once again, remember that you are doing the right thing in freeing yourself 
from the relationship. Following these steps can be helpful, but if you are 
unable to get access to the proper funds or necessities, or you do not have a 
mode of transportation to get out of the home, you can call your local 
domestic violence hotline. They should have resources that can help you 


remove yourself and your children from the home. 


As a benefit, domestic violence hotlines and shelters will have access to 
several benefits that can really help you get out of the abusive relationship 
and free yourself once and for all. You will have access to lawyers, shelters, 
financial help, counselors, and more, all of whom will specialize in helping 


and working with people in situations like yours. 


Chapter 10: Staying Free 


Once you are finally out of the relationship, you may find that after some 
time, you miss it. You will miss your ex, and while he may have been 
abusive or threatening, you still spent a portion of your life with him and 
feel like you want that back. It is only natural to miss those that you care 
about, but ultimately, you must have the self-confidence and self-discipline 


to remind yourself that you made the right decision to leave. 


In particular, you may find that you miss the good times, and that is natural. 
If your relationship had been nothing but negative, it never would have 
progressed beyond the initial date—the narcissist had to be able to win you 
over somehow, and that usually involves some sort of façade and persona. 
Nevertheless, it can be incredibly difficult to avoid the feelings of wanting 
to go back to the abuser, even after you have finally escaped once and for 
all. 


Keep in mind that if you have just escaped your relationship and feel like 
you want to go back, you are not alone. On average, it takes at least seven 
attempts for a person to break free from an abusive partner. However, just 
because wanting to go back and knowing that other people regularly go 
back does not mean that you should simply decide to go back because you 
miss your ex—you should try to resist. Retain that freedom that you fought 


for so hard and make sure that you stay free. 


In particular, this chapter will take the time to provide you with some 
advice designed to help keep you from returning to your abusive situation 
despite the temptation and desire you may have to do exactly that. Even if 
you are depressed where you are, or feeling like your home would be better 
than the room in a shelter that you are in, resist. Any time that you feel like 
you are wishing that things were different or when you tell yourself that you 
are struggling due to your own failures, remind yourself that abuse is not 
your fault. It is not your fault that you were targeted by a narcissist. You 
were preyed upon by the abuser, and that had nothing to do with who you 
are or what you deserve. You could never have known that everything 
would play out the way that they did. That is not your fault, and it never 
will be. 


The road to recovery begins with you no longer taking blame for the 
narcissist’s actions. This means that you must reject the idea that you are 
somehow at fault for everything that happened. The abuse lies firmly with 
the narcissist, and you need to remind yourself of that. Remind yourself that 
no one deserves to be abused in your moments of weakness, and remind 
yourself that you may not be where you had hoped to be, but at least you 
are free. You have left that cage once and for all and you are finally free to 


stretch your wings and learn to fly. 


Now that you are away, it is time to stay away. You can do it. 


Find Support 


The first way that can help you strengthen your resolve during those 
moments of weakness is to find support. Find friends or family that you can 
turn to if you need to talk during those moments, knowing that you will be 
fully and wholly supported by them when you do so. Make sure that you 
primarily surround yourself with people that you know and trust, or find a 


support group for people with similar stories to you. 


If you have gone through a domestic violence shelter, you may already have 
access to this by having access to all of the resources that usually follow the 
shelter. They likely have support groups held for those living at the shelter 
at any given time. If they do not have a support group, they can surely point 


you in the right direction toward finding one that will be beneficial to you. 


You are very likely to find that being able to talk to other people will 
actually be incredibly beneficial to you—when you can talk to others, you 
are free to hear other stories .Just knowing that other people have lived 
through what you have been through can help you find comfort in those 
moments of loneliness when you are wondering where you went so wrong. 
You will be able to branch out and make new friends who have been where 
you are. They will know how to help you simply because they will have 
been there before, and their advice can be absolutely critical to keeping you 


afloat during such a dark time. 


Write Down Your Reasons for Leaving 


Another way that may help you fight off all of the tempting feelings of 
going back to the narcissist is to write down every reason that you left. 
Spend the time when you are safe to go over what made you finally pull the 
trigger and leave. For Talia, it was that the Ned she knew was a lie. She did 
not appreciate being fooled into falling in love for someone who never 
existed in the first place. For you, it could be that you are sick of the abuse. 
You finally acknowledge that you deserve better, or that your children 


deserve better. 


If you do have children, look at them. Do they deserve to grow up in a 
home full of dysfunction? Do you really want that life for them? Most 
parents would never want that for their children, and for them, leaving 


would be the obvious choice. 


Of course, just because you know that you would want better for your 
children does not mean that your feelings will just stop. Your feelings are 


just that—feelings—, and they are not to be believed. 


After having written down all of the reasons that you can think of for 
leaving, you can return to the list any time that you are feeling week. Are 
you thinking about that one date that you had that was entirely romantic, 
next to the beach? Remind yourself that it was probably a lie and that the 
narcissist most likely felt nothing for you and read over your list. Are you 
realizing that your birthday is coming up, and you are going to have to 
spend it without an adult to talk to? Read over that list again and remind 


yourself why it is so important to you. 


Consider also writing down any and all instances of suspected gaslighting 
that you can think of. Think about all the times that your ex told you 


something was wrong or that you were not remembering things properly. 


Think of how you felt, feeling like you were slowly losing your mind, and 
latch onto that anger. Tell yourself that you are not going to accept that 
treatment again, and you are not willing to return to being treated like you 


cannot possibly understand what is right in front of your face. 


Find a Hobby 


Perhaps one of the least specific pieces of advice that you are ever going to 
receive consider finding a hobby or something else to keep you busy during 
moments of weakness. Just having something else to do to occupy the time 
can help the feeling pass, even when you are feeling tempted to return back 


to the narcissist for any reason at all. 


Have you ever wanted to try something new or learn a new skill? This is the 
time to go for it—figure out exactly what it is that you have been wanting in 
life and go for it. If you have always dreamed of learning to draw without 
being mocked or laughed at for whatever you have chosen as your medium 
or subject, now is your time. Do you want to make it a point to learn how to 
knit? Take some extra cash if you have it and go get a beginner’s kit. You 
have nothing but time on your hands that used to be filled by the narcissist 


—take it back and do something for yourself. 


This does two things: Not only are you keeping yourself busy, but you are 
also doing something to better yourself, and bettering yourself may help 
you feel better about yourself. Boosting your self-confidence as you 


succeed at a new skill is always a huge welcome bonus. 


Chapter 11: The Importance of Empathy 


Empathy is one of those buzzwords that you hear thrown around a lot in 
modern psychology and self-help sources. You may hear the empath 
discussed, especially in regards to narcissism. You may hear people say that 
they are an empath at heart, or that they are incredibly empathetic. 


However, do you know what is meant by calling someone an empath? 


Empaths are people who are highly in tune to their surroundings and those 
within them. In particular, they are usually able to sense the feelings of 
others with ease. This is a skill known as empathy, and this is a critical skill 
for people to master. Empathy is the skill that the narcissist does not have— 
he cannot empathize, and because he cannot empathize, he cannot 


effectively manage to relate to other people. 


How about you? Are you empathetic? Do you have a good idea of what 
empathy is? Do you want to be more empathetic? What can empathetic 


behavior help you do, and how can it be beneficial? 


All of these are fantastic questions to ask if you are unfamiliar with the 
concept of empathy itself. Even if you are unfamiliar, do not fret—this 
chapter is focused on empathy and how you can use it to protect yourself. In 
particular, we will delve into looking at what empathy is, what the types of 
empathy are, and how empathy can be used to help you better yourself. You 
will see how empathy can fight narcissism, as well as how you can use it to 


become less susceptible to narcissism as a whole. 


What is Empathy? 


Empathy, at its simplest, is the human capacity to relate to other people. 
You use empathy to help facilitate communication, for example, in order to 
better understand those around you. It allows you to understand what those 
around you are feeling in particular, allowing you to essentially step into the 


shoes of the other person by relating to them. 


Imagine for a moment that you are walking down the street and you see a 
homeless person sitting out in the rain. You feel sad for the person because 
he is stuck out in the rain and it is cold. You understand what it means to be 
cold and wet, something that you have been before, though maybe not 
within the same context, and you feel empathetic for the man. You know 
that he is likely suffering, and that makes you feel sad and hopeless. 
Effectively, you take on the feelings of the other person in order to relate to 


him. 


It serves a secondary purpose as well: It allows you to regulate your own 
behaviors appropriately. For example, if you can see that you are making 
your child upset as you yell, you are likely to stop, feel those feelings that 
your child is in response to your yelling, and use that knowledge to regulate 
your own emotions. You then make it a point tO avoid yelling because you 
know that it was causing problems in your relationship with your child. 
When you do this, you effectively are using your empathy in order to 


regulate yourself and your behavior, and that is a critical social skill to have. 


You know that the narcissist not having this ability is a major reason that he 


is unable to relate to those around him, and that is what made him more 


likely to be abusive, after all. Empathy then has two very serious functions: 


Communication and regulation. 


When you are able to communicate your emotional state to other people, 
you are effectively able to make sure that you are actively broadcasting out 
your needs. After all, emotions are closely linked to needs that must be met, 
so when you are having your emotions read by someone else, they are 
effectively learning what your needs are. If they see that you are sad, they 
are likely to know that you need support, simply because that is what 
sadness conveys—a need for support. If they see that you are afraid, they 
are going to know that what you need is safety, as something present around 


you is frightening you. 


Empathy then allows for nonverbal communication. It allows for people to 
tell others exactly what they need at that given moment without them 
having to ever say a word. Think of how effective that is—how long would 
it take if every time that you had a feeling, you had to verbally express that 
you were happy or sad? You would spend an awful long time talking about 
your constantly fluctuating emotions, especially since emotions are not 
particularly stable in the first place. Emotions are constantly fluctuating; 
sometimes, every few seconds, and empathy allows for their 


communication easily. 


Types of Empathy 


Empathy primarily exists in three forms that are important to understand. 
These three forms are cognitive, emotional, and compassionate. Each serves 
a slightly different purpose, but it is only when you are able to be 
completely empathetic that you become truly capable of using everything 
that empathy has to offer you. 

Cognitive empathy is the ability to understand emotions. It is entirely 
cognitive, with nothing to do with emotions or feelings. This is your ability 
to look at someone else, see a smile, and understand that they must be 
happy. You do not have to actively be feeling that happiness—you just 
know that is what is being felt simply because you know that smiling is a 


sign of happiness. 


This form of empathy is quite simplistic, but it has its own uses. You can 
still make good inferences on the emotional states of others and, therefore, 
their needs that they have at that moment if you are able to read how 
someone is feeling. This means that you can tell what is going on without 


really feeling compelled toward anything. 


Emotional empathy goes one step further. When you are able to empathize 
emotionally, you are able to feel the emotions of the other person. You see 
that person smiling, and feel the need to smile yourself as well. That smile 
becomes entirely contagious, and you cannot help but feel the need to smile 
as well. This is also incredibly important to understand—when you can 
empathize emotionally, you better understand the mindset of the other 
person. You are more likely to relate well if you can feel the other party’s 


feelings as well. For example, you are more likely to feel like you should 


relate. If you see someone that is scared and you feel that fear just by 


looking at the other person, you are going to be more likely to want to help. 


That brings us to compassionate empathy. This form of empathy is 
entirely about combining other forms of empathy. You are essentially taking 
over the cognitive and emotional empathies and recognizing what each 
brings to the table. In recognizing the cognitive state of the other party, you 
get a good idea of what is going on in the other person’s mind. You can start 
to piece together why they feel the way that they do. With the emotional 
empathy added in as well, you find that you are more compelled to help. 
You can feel how they feel and you want to make sure that the other people 
are taken care of as well. This means that you can use your empathy to 
ensure that anyone that you are surrounding yourself with is able to make 


sure their needs are met at any given time. 


Compassionate empathy is what should be striven for. It allows people to 
take care of each other, coming together to ensure that everyone’s needs get 
met. As a social species, we are strongly dependent upon each other to 
ensure that we can actually engage with other people. We are actually able 
to make sure that we can take care of each other simply because we actually 


relate to each other. 


When everyone feels compassionate empathy for each other, people are 
happy to help simply to help. They understand that if they help their 
neighbors, their neighbors are also likely to help them when they have a 
time of need as well. This is incredibly important—when you are able to 


rely on your neighbors, the survival of the species is more likely. 


Of course, nowadays, we do not need to depend on others for as much 
survival. You no longer have to worry about planting enough food to last all 
winter—you can just go to the store. You can call people and pay them 
money to help them. You no longer have to foster these close, neighborly 
relationships, but that comes at a pretty significant cost—you are no longer 


making those bonds that were once commonplace. 


Empathy to Fight Narcissism 


When you are trying to deal with a narcissist, you may find yourself 
struggling immensely. You find that it is next to impossible to approach the 
situation and figure out how to convince the narcissist that they are wrong 
—because they are hardwired to deny the idea of being wrong. They have 
to be right at all times, even if that comes at the cost of hurting other 
people. While people can try to teach the narcissist to behave and to take 
into consideration the feelings of others, it is not likely to get particularly 
far. Instead, what may be the best way to handle the narcissist is to 


approach the narcissist with empathy. 


When you approach the narcissist with an empathetic approach in mind, 
you are not doing it to have your actions reciprocated—you already know 
that the narcissist will not do that at any point in time. However, you can 
use your own empathy to acknowledge what is going on with the narcissist. 
Just because the narcissist does not empathize on his own does not mean 
that you cannot remove some of the threats by approaching the narcissist 


with an empathetic perspective. 


This does not even mean that you have to approach the narcissist at all—all 
you need to do is be willing to consider the fact that the narcissist is simply 
hardwired differently and that his attempts to control should not be met with 


anger and frustration. 


Think about it this way for a moment—f the narcissist were a snake, would 
you really fault him for biting you? The answer is probably no—you would 


expect it to bite you, and therefore, you would take the necessary steps to 


keep your own distance. This is exactly what you will be doing with 
empathy and your approach to narcissists. If you can identify someone as a 
narcissist, just leave them be. Give them their peace and their space and 
simply refuse to engage. If you can do this, approaching the situation 
pragmatically and empathetically, you remove much of the danger. The 
narcissist is going to have a hard time inflicting emotional harm if you have 


already discredited and disregarded him. 


What if, instead of feeling like the narcissist were truly evil, you looked at 
why he was the way he was? You may stop and consider that you, too, feel 
grandiose sometimes—such as when you are successful at something. 
Perhaps you felt that little flare of grandiosity when you finally escaped. 
This is not a bad thing—that feeling has a very good reinforcing purpose. 
However, the narcissist is incredibly grandiose to a fault and to a point in 
which it can actually be annoying and problematic. He causes issues with 
his grandiosity because his grandiosity is unchecked. However, is that his 


fault, or is that because of his personality disorder? 


Now, while you will never be told that you absolutely must treat the 
narcissist as your best friend, you should remember to empathize with him 
from time to time. Remember that empathizing is not the same as 
forgiveness, nor is it saying that you are willing to give him another chance. 
More than anything, it is your ability to recognize what the narcissist is 
capable of and why he is the way that he is. After all, if you chose to 
disregard your ability to empathize with the narcissist, would you be any 
better than he is? The narcissist does not empathize because it just does not 
come naturally to him. However, if it comes naturally to you, should you 


automatically approach the world with that empathy? 


Many people would say yes, that empathy is kind and compassionate and 
will make the world a better place. Overall, it will be up to you whether you 
want to use empathy with the narcissist, but it should be strongly 


considered. 


Empathy to Increase Self-Awareness 


Beyond just to understand people, empathy is actually quite useful in the 
development of other social skills as well. In particular, empathy is a great 
segue to self-awareness, and that self-awareness can really help you to fight 
off the tendency to fall into aggressive or abusive relationships. When you 
are self-aware, you recognize yourself. You know what your true abilities 
and feelings are, and that your self-awareness is accurate. In particular, self- 
awareness is necessary if you want to be able to regulate your own 


behaviors, thanks to knowing your limits. 


When you are not particularly self-aware, you run into a lot of the same 
problems that the narcissist suffers from. You will find that you cannot 
regulate yourself effectively, and if you cannot understand your own 
feelings, you are not going to be able to understand the feelings of others, 
either. 

However, if you already have a base of being highly empathetic, you can try 
to use that empathy to really help you understand other people as well. If 


you can see what someone else’s body, language is saying. 


Ultimately, your self-awareness and ability to empathize are far closer 
related than you may have thought, and the more empathy you have, the 
more likely you are to make it a point to regulate what you are saying. That 
regulation of understanding what is going on is what will help you with the 
development of self-awareness. If you know that your actions are upsetting 
other people, for example, you are coming across in a way that is clearly 


inappropriate in the eyes of other people. This means that other people are 


entirely unhappy with how you are presenting yourself, and you will need 


to figure out why. 


Your empathy then allows you to start figuring out why they were unhappy. 
What did you do that caused it? If you see that in particular, people seem to 
be annoyed with your insistence to do something a certain way, you could 
assume that your desire to complete whatever it was is the problem. Perhaps 


you were coming across as pushy. 


Now, you are able to acknowledge that the people were annoyed with you, 
and then figure out exactly why. When you are aware of what you are doing 
and how it is impacting those around you, you are far more likely to be 


cautious in the future. You will then be more self-aware. 


Effectively, then, self-awareness is regulated by empathy, and that makes 


the two quite powerful when used in tandem. 


Empathy to Build Self-Esteem 


Just as empathy and self-awareness are closely related, you must also be 
able to acknowledge the fact that empathy and self-esteem share a similar 
bond. Self-esteem is critical to how we see ourselves. Your own self-esteem 
is largely the way that you view yourself in the world. Are you happy with 
who you are, or do you feel like something about your personality is 
inherently flawed? Do you feel like your ability to help other people is so 
incredibly stunted that you are not particularly valuable, or do you think 


that you are a good person? 


Think about self-esteem for a moment and what the words may mean. You 
are literally creating an estimate of yourself. You are effectively defining 
your value, as seen in your own eyes. If you have a high self-esteem, or a 
healthy self-esteem, you view yourself quite positively. Some people’s self- 
esteem may be too high, such as the narcissist—but in moderation, self- 
esteem is critical to being successful in the world around you. If you have a 
healthy self-esteem, you have your own boundaries and limits for yourself. 
You are effectively able to say that you respect yourself and put a line on 
where that respect is. You can tell what you think about yourself by looking 
at that line. 


Low self-esteem, however, implies that your image of yourself is quite 
negative. You feel like the image that you present is problematic or flawed, 
or you feel like the person that you are is inherently negative. When you 
have a low self-esteem, you do not trust yourself. You do not think that the 
person that you are is worthy of respect or love, or you may even feel like 


you are a waste of space and time in the world. 


Self-esteem is one of those traits that you want in moderation in order to be 
healthy, and empathy can help you achieve exactly that. Consider, for a 


moment, the effect of mutual empathy. 


For example, imagine that you and your friend are able to empathize with 
each other. You are able to respect each other and show each other how 
much you care about each other. You can make sure that you are able to 
show the other person your own assessment of their own worth. You value 
them, and you are able to show that through relating to their feelings. The 
more you empathize with someone, the more you value who they are, what 


they like, and how you see them. 


Now, if you just empathized with your friend, how do you think that made 


him feel? 


The answer is that he probably felt pretty good—he was justified by you 
acknowledging his position and his own feelings, and that was something 
that he truly appreciated. You effectively showed him that he cared, and in 


response, he was happier than he had been in a while. 


Now, consider that the empathy is mutual—he empathized with you when 
you were talking about the problem with the narcissist that you have 


recently escaped from. You feel validated and supported, as well. 


When you feel like people validate and support you, you feel like other 
people are hearing who you are and actually caring about what you are 


saying. This means that you are able to see that other people are, in fact, 


acknowledging you, your feelings, and your likes and dislikes. You are 
seeing that, unlike how the narcissist told you, you do have inherent value. 
The narcissist may have damaged your self-esteem by refusing to 
acknowledge your values and emotions, but you can begin to heal from 
that. You can draw from the empathy of others to begin to heal those 


wounds. 


Empathy reminds you that others in the world do, in fact, care about you. 
They do care what you think about the world. They do care how you are 
feeling and whether you can claim that all of your needs have been met. 
They want to ensure that you are able to take care of yourself, and they are 
able to help. 


If even random strangers that you do not know can empathize with you, 
then what does that tell you? It tells you that your self-esteem should 
improve. It tells you that your narcissistic ex’s attempts to belittle you and 
bring you down were little more than tools to keep you easily subdued, and 


without the narcissist present, you should be willing to acknowledge this. 


This means then that without the narcissist to continue bringing you down 
you should be able to begin healing more and more. You can make sure that 
you are actually beginning to feel better, and acknowledging that you do 
have an inherent value that other people see. Empathy will remind you to 
heal that inherent value. It will help that damaged; wilted self-esteem begin 
to blossom and flourish once more, nourished upon the love and empathy 
from other people. If other people can see your value without knowing you, 


then you must have some. 


Chapter 12: Protecting Yourself Against Future 
Abuse 


Finally, you have made it—this is the last chapter within the book. 
Congratulations on your journey, and good luck as you begin to enter the 
chapter dedicated to bettering yourself! While it is in no way your fault that 
you were abused and manipulated, you may be wondering what you can do 
in the future in order to avoid finding yourself victimized again. The answer 
is that there is no true way to never be the victim of an abusive relationship 
again unless you simply never get into a relationship. However, that is an 
incredibly unhealthy way to live life. People crave the closeness and 
intimacy of their relationships, and you deserve to acknowledge that need, 


even if it is tough to do so. 


While you cannot exactly create a foolproof guard against abuse, what you 
can do is make sure that you have chosen a way to sort of shield yourself. 
You can armor yourself into becoming someone who is a less attractive 
target for emotional and narcissistic abuse. Think for a moment about the 
narcissist’s favorite target—how many of those traits did you have? If I had 
to guess, I would say that you actually had several—and that is okay. 
However, you will need to make sure that you are actively bettering 
yourself in order to remain as protected as you can be. If you lack self- 
confidence, learning to be confident is the natural next step. If you feel like 
the problem is something inherent with you, you may find benefit from 
therapy. You may decide to develop your own emotional intelligence in an 
attempt to better protect yourself in the future, or you may create 


affirmations to help you build up some self-esteem and self-worth. No 


matter what you choose to do, you will be able to acknowledge that you are 


bettering yourself in some way to help yourself remain safe in the future. 


As you read through this chapter, do not feel like you are limited to what is 
discussed. If you want to build confidence, but have a different method that 
you would like to use, then go for it. Trust yourself and your own judgment. 
After all, you are your own free person now, and you can choose what you 
will do and where you will do it. You do not need the permission of a book 


to make sure that you can get the build up and protection that you want! 


Building Confidence 


Let’s start by defining confidence once more—it is your ability to feel like 
you can rely on yourself. If you are confident, you feel like you are 
trustworthy and that you will protect yourself in some way. You will 
effectively make sure that you are able to trust your own judgment if you 
are confident, allowing you to resist the urge to fall for any future 
gaslighting attempts. 


Remember, the reason that you were likely so susceptible to many of the 
abuse tactics was a lack of confidence. That confidence is perhaps your 
greatest shield that will protect you from an emotional manipulator. 
Because confidence will mean that you trust yourself, your thoughts, and 
your perceptions inherently, you remove the power of being able to 
convince you that you are wrong. The narcissist needs someone that is not 
particularly confident specifically because keeping someone that is not 
particularly confident is keeping someone who is very easily manipulated 


and controlled. This means that the best targets are those without the 


confidence to trust themselves and respect themselves to leave any sort of 


abusive situation. 


When you want to develop your own confidence, you are effectively going 
to be teaching yourself to trust your judgment. This means that you will be 
doing several little trust exercises to ensure that you are actually able to 
remain safe. Thankfully, confidence is not fixed—it is a skill that you can 
develop over time through practice. It will be a matter of finding aspects of 


life that will help to bring you confidence. 


Do you like sports? Perhaps you join a martial arts class aimed toward 
domestic abuse survivors to help foster a sense of self-confidence. Do you 
like video games? Pick a new one and get good at it. No matter what you 
do, the important part is that you must choose something to dedicate 
yourself to doing, allow yourself to follow through, and then make sure that 
you acknowledge to yourself that you did do whatever it was that you set 


out to do. 


Over time, you will find that your confidence will build. You may find that 
social interactions with people grow easier because you are not as ashamed 
of yourself. You may do better at job interviews because you feel better 
about who you are, or that you have a higher value than before. No matter 
the technique that you are going to use, just make sure that you stick to it 
and continue to acknowledge yourself and your abilities over time. All you 
will need to do is ensure that you are able to be the person that you are 
trying to be. Putting in that effort and actively striving to be the best will 
help you see the best results. 


Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 


If you were easily victimized by the manipulator or the narcissist, it may be 
worth spending some time in cognitive behavioral therapy. In particular, 
this therapy is quite skilled at making sure that you are able to protect 
yourself. You will be able to learn several skills that will be able to help you 


be as successful as you desire to be. 


In particular, CBT focuses on how to teach you how to become able to cope 
with any problem that you face. Is your self-esteem low? With CBT, you 
can learn to identify why your self-esteem is slow in the first place and then 
figure out how to begin restructuring those thoughts into something that is 
more productive, beneficial to everyone, and capable of helping you 
become happier. CBT is all about cognitive restructuring, figuring out how 
to identify those thoughts that pose the biggest challenges to us and then 
becoming capable of correcting them in order to ensure that we are better in 


general. 


Think about the difference between CBT and a traditional therapy for a 
moment—a traditional psychotherapy is going to focus on you being able to 
talk through your problems. It may help you solve that one problem that has 
been driving you insane, but is it really going to make sure that you are 


actually fully capable of solving problems on its own? No, it won’t. 


CBT seeks to teach all sorts of different coping mechanisms that can be 
used to help better yourself. You will have techniques for defeating phobias 
and for learning how to change your thoughts. You will learn how to cope 


with stress and how to make yourself that much stronger of a person. You 


will be able to do it all, thanks to the fact that you will be able to learn skills 


that are vague enough to be used in nearly any setting. 


That is the magic of CBT and why it is so effective—it is tool-based. All 
you will do is figure out how to use the tools that will help you get through 
the process of coping with stress, and that is powerful. Think of the 
expression of being able to teach a man to fish and feeding him for a 
lifetime. CBT is effectively teaching you to fish, and you will be able to 
reuse them over and over again. So long as you are willing to continue 
using those techniques, you will find that you are able to continue to see 


effects over and over again. 


Keep in mind that there is no shame or harm in therapy. You should never 
be made to feel like you are less than capable because you have gotten help 
coping with your problems. In fact, being willing to admit that you need 
help is far more admirable than refusing to ever go. If you were willing to 
put in the effort with your own skills, learning to cope with your own 


problems, you deserve that recognition. 


Even better, doing so will help you protect yourself from the narcissist once 
and for all. You will be able to patch up all of those traits that that narcissist 
enjoys, so you are not so susceptible. You will be able to tell yourself that 
you can develop self-esteem. You will be able to figure out your 
codependency problem. You will be able to figure out exactly why you 
were so willing to put up with all of that abuse for so long and how you can 
finally overcome it. You will learn how to figure out the best way to boost 


your self-confidence and self-esteem, as well as how to use your empathy 


effectively, all with the help of this therapy that you may otherwise have 


chosen to avoid out of fear of stigma. 


Emotional Intelligence 


One other skillset that may be beneficial to protecting yourself as well is 
learning to be emotionally intelligent. Emotional intelligence is defined as 
the ability to understand and identify your own emotions, as well as 
regulate them. You will also be able to identify and regulate the feelings of 


other people as well with this skillset. 


In particular, those who use emotional intelligence recognize that there are 
four distinct skillsets that go into it: There is the skillset of self-awareness, 
the skillset of self-regulation, the skillset of social awareness, and the 
skillset of relationship management. Each of these are useful in their own 
different ways, but when all four come together, you can create skilled 


leaders that are empathetic, persuasive, well-liked, and confident. 


Self-awareness in emotional intelligence is a focus on how to understand 
your own emotions and abilities. You will effectively look at how you are 
behaving and feeling. You will also be taking a closer look at how 
accurately you can identify your strengths and weaknesses. You need to be 
able to understand your weaknesses and strengths if you ever hope to better 
yourself and make sure that you know what you are capable of. When you 
know what you are capable of, you can make only the commitments that 
you know that you can do, and if you know where you struggle, you can ask 
for help without worrying about how you will fail if you attempt to actually 


go through with trying to work within your weaknesses. 


Self-regulation focuses on your ability to control yourself. You will be 


understanding how to avoid responding to those emotional impulses that 


you feel that push you toward behaviors that would otherwise be 
problematic, such as actively making it a point to avoid yelling, despite 
wanting to yell incredibly badly. When you can self-regulate, you avoid 


hurting other people through carelessness. 


Social awareness refers to your ability to empathize with other people and 
understand the emotions of other people. When you are able to empathize 
with other people, you can directly understand what they are feeling and 
thinking, which provides valuable insight to needs and motivations. With 
your ability to empathize in emotional intelligence, you are able to begin 


figuring out how to regulate the behaviors of others as well. 


When you learn to regulate the behaviors of others as well, you are learning 
the skill of relationship management. You are learning to accurately 
determine what people are capable of, see how they interact with other 
people, and figure out how they are able to best benefit everyone involved. 
Effectively, then, you are able to begin to influence the behaviors of others 
with ease as well. You do this through watching how your own behaviors 
influence the emotional states of others in order to figure out the best 


approach. 


Developing emotional intelligence does not need to be difficult—all it takes 
is some patience and willing to read books, not unlike this one. If you think 
that you could benefit from emotional intelligence, it is a highly 
recommended technique and segues away from understanding abuse and 


the reasons behind abuse. 


Affirmations 


Finally, the last technique that you will be given to help yourself is how to 
create an affirmation. This is an incredibly common technique that can be 
used to help you change your mindset little by little. When you use an 
affirmation, you will effectively be able to make sure that you can tell 
yourself something short that reminds you to change the way that you are 
thinking in that moment. Commonly used to combat negative thoughts, you 
may find this particularly useful if the narcissist has really done a number 


on your self-worth. 


To create an affirmation, you must simply follow three specific rules: It 
must be positive, it must be personal, and it must be present-tense. Let’s go 


over why each of these points are important: 


When you make a positive affirmation, you are making sure that it is 
keeping you in the right mindset. After so long being talked to in the 
negative by the narcissist, it is time to break away once and for all. This 
means that you will need to figure out how best to word whatever you wish 
in positives. For example, if you want to not be so negative, you may 


instead write your affirmation to focus on thinking positively instead. 


When you make a personal affirmation, you make sure that it is something 
that you have control over. You can control yourself, so you want to make 
sure that your affirmation is aimed toward yourself. When it is, you can 
ensure that it is something that you can regulate effectively enough. For 
example, you can tell yourself that you are going to think positive thoughts, 


but you cannot tell yourself that you will make the narcissist think 


positively. This is exactly why your affirmation has to be personal—so you 


can regulate it. 


Finally, when you make sure that your affirmation is present-tense, you are 
asserting that it is true right at that moment. If it were worded in the future 
tense, you could arguably say that you would not start to work on it until 
sometime in the future, meaning that it is not actually true that moment, and 
likewise, if it were oriented in the past tense, you could deny that it was 


actually true right at that minute. For that reason, it must be present-tense. 


So now, you have three requirements: it must be personal, positive, and 
present-tense. To figure out your affirmation, figure out first what you want. 
If you want to feel more confident, for example, you may set up so you 
repeat notes of positivity to yourself. You tell yourself that you are good 
enough exactly the way you are with a statement such as, “I am happy with 
who I am today.” Notice how it is present-tense, it is positive, and it is 


personal. This means that it is effective. 


From there, the affirmation is then used any time you feel like you need a 
little extra push toward the positive mindset you are trying to maintain. If 
you are trying to keep that positivity, you may make sure that it is repeated 
any time you start to doubt yourself. Any time that you feel like you are less 
than thrilled with yourself, you remind yourself that you are happy with the 
you that you are that day. 


On top of that, affirmations are particularly effective when they are used on 
the regular while you are doing something else habitual. Maybe you repeat 


your affirmation every time you buckle your seatbelt in the car or every 


time that you stop for water throughout the day. In repeating your 
affirmation throughout the day, you make yourself more likely to finally 
internalize and believe it over time. Just as the narcissist was able to insert 
negative thoughts into your own mind with repetition, you can create your 


own positive thoughts with your own repetition as well. 


Conclusion 


Thank you for reaching the end of Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse 
Recovery. This book was designed to give you a full portrait of who the 
emotional abuser and narcissist are as people, understanding exactly how 


cruel and insidious they can be, as well as how to recover yourself. 


As you read through this book, you were provided with several reminders 
that abuse is never your own fault. When you are abused, someone else has 
made the choice to hurt you, and that does not reflect on who you are as a 
person. You must remember this—you cannot be held accountable for the 
fact that someone else has abused you. Nevertheless, you can choose how 
to handle that abuse. 


Within this book, you were shown exactly how you should treat the abuse 
that you have faced if you have spent your life with a narcissist. You were 
guided through how to identify whether you have been abused in the past, 
how to identify the abuser, and how to begin to heal. You were walked 
through the kinds of abuse that are common with narcissists, as well as how 


you can fight back. 


Ultimately, as you have finished up this book, it is with the utmost hope that 
you have found this book to be beneficial and informative. Every effort was 
made to make sure that it not only packed plenty of information about 
understanding the narcissist and the abuser but also how to combat that 
abuse in a way that is actionable. In reading through this book, you should 


have found at least some techniques that would help you. 


From here, your best bet is to continue working on yourself. If you have 
been caught in a narcissistic relationship, take the time to heal and work on 
who you are. Build up that self-esteem and self-confidence little by little. 
Learn how to combat abuse and manipulation, more specifically. You may 
decide that you want to spend the time to become more emotionally 
intelligent to help you build that confidence and empathy, and that would be 
a fantastic starting point. Cognitive behavioral therapy would be another 


stellar place to go from here. 


Nevertheless, as you wrap up this book, please accept my heartfelt 
appreciation in being willing to take this journey. Remember that you did 
not deserve to be abused, nor should you ever tolerate the abuse that you 
have endured in the past. You deserve to be treated with love and patience 
and to find someone that loves the person that you are. If you can find that 


person, you will find that life gets so much better. 


Remember the signs that were given for the narcissist and narcissistic abuse 
as you continue on your journey, and finally, if you have found that the 
book provided has helped you in any truly meaningful way, whether 
through the insight provided, in the tools given to you, or in the 
understanding of the narcissist, please feel free to move over to Amazon 
and leave a review with your honest opinion. Feedback from readers is 
always greatly appreciated and encouraged. Your feedback will help the 


next book be even better! 


Thank you and good luck once more—You can do this! 




END OF INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGY