Chapter 1: Delving into Dark Psychology hen talking about dark psychology, it’s quite common to think about techniques like brainwashing and manipulation. But the fact of the matter is we don’t really know how deep dark psychology goes. After all, there is a definite method to the madness. We can’t just simply accept that dark psychology is some random phenomenon that occurs as a result of people’s wish to get their way. The truth is that there is a clear method that can be applied in various ways. That’s why this is devoted to analyzing the fundamentals of dark psychology and how it can become manifest in daily life. This will enable you to get a good foundation on this topic right from the beginning. It will allow you to begin to see the patterns that are evident in everyday life. What is Dark Psychology? For starters, it’s worth taking the time to define psychology, and subsequently, dark psychology. Generally speaking, psychology is considered to be the study of the human mind. However, broader definitions place psychology as the study of the mind and the soul. This broader interpretation makes it a bit harder to comprehend psychology as we don’t really know what the soul is. As such, it’s better to stick with the narrower vision of psychology which is the study of the mind. The mind, or psyche, is a place where thoughts, ideas and emotions can be located. This is important to note as understanding the fact that humans are made up of emotions will help you get a better feel for dark psychology. This assumption is based on the fact that emotions drive our actions and consequently influence the decisions we make. It is very rare to find individuals who maintain an objective view of life and the circumstances around them. As a result, most people tend to view things from their own personal perspective as opposed to seeing things detached from their personal emotions and valuations. Consequently, dark psychology is the application of general psychological concepts for personal gain. That’s a fairly straightforward assessment. If you plan to use psychology to help others manage their emotions and so on, then you are not in the domain of “dark” psychology. When you think about anything that’s dark, you ought to keep your mind focused on the fact that we're talking about personal gain and benefit as opposed to helping others feel better about themselves. Now, it should be noted that we’re not necessarily talking about harming others; it’s just a question of using these techniques for your personal gain. Dark Persuasion Versus Covert Emotional Manipulation When talking about persuasion, we’re referring to the act of getting an individual to comply with a certain set of demands and requests as a result of a compelling set of reasons. This implies that the manipulator must find a way to convince their target so that they follow suit out of their own free will. This type of approach implies that the target is acting out of their own free will. So, there is no manipulation to speak of. However, things change when we begin to talk about “dark” persuasion. In dark manipulation, we’re venturing into territory in which tricks and strategies are applied to essentially force the target to do one thing or another. Such tricks and techniques may include things like coercion. Coercion happens any time a manipulator looks to exert their influence through some sort of mechanism in which the victim has no choice but to comply lest they fact the circumstances of their non compliance. With emotional manipulation, the difference lies in the fact that the manipulator exploits certain emotional weaknesses that the victim cannot truly hide. For instance, a person who lacks affection may be tricked into doing the manipulator’s bidding out of the hope of getting the affection they seek. Moreover, the term “covert” implies that the manipulation taking place is not exactly open and obvious. Rather, it is done in a concealed manner in which the manipulator’s true intent is not evident, at least on the surface. Now, it should be said that cover emotional manipulation may happen instinctively on the part of the manipulator, that is, the manipulator isn’t fully aware that what they are doing is manipulation. This is common in people with a narcissistic personality. However, the situation really gets dark when these attitudes are done consciously and with premeditation. People Who Use Dark Psychology to Manipulate Others This is a broad question to discuss as virtually anyone can use dark psychology at any given time. Perhaps the line can be drawn when a person stops using compelling arguments and reasoning to influence others and resorts to other tactics that might be considered inappropriate or simply frowned upon by society. Such tactics aren’t always sanctioned by society but are commonly used. That is why they fall under the “dark” realm, considering the fact that if an individual is caught using them, they will most likely suffer from some type of repercussion. That being said, common areas in which you will find dark psychology are advertising, politics, religion, the workplace, relationships, family and entertainment, to name a few. When you think of these areas, perhaps the thought of dark psychology doesn’t immediately jump at you. But when you begin to peel back some of the layers, you will find that they are prevalent throughout our daily interactions. Let’s consider advertising for a moment. A common tactic such as “limited time offer” is perfectly valid is the offer is indeed for a limited time. However, a long running infomercial uses this call to action all the time. After a while, it’s obvious that it’s not a limited time offer. It’s just a ploy that’s used to get others to buy right then and there. Perhaps a more forthcoming approach might have been to be honest that the offer stands “while supplies last.” The “limited time offer” tactic enters the realm of dark psychology the moment advertisers are lying to consumers. When consumers finally figure out that it’s just a ploy, the advert ceases to work. And just like this example, the world is littered with such ploys. The difference lies in that some are much more elaborate than others. Another classic example is politics. Politicians spend a great deal of resources trying to figure out what voters want to hear. Then, they go out and say the things that will resonate with voters. The same goes for religious cult leaders. They generally prey on the primal emotion of fear. They tell people that it’s the end of the world. So, they need to get on board before they are left behind to suffer. This is how cult leaders gain a huge following in a short period of time. Dark Persuasion Throughout History There is nothing new about dark psychology and persuasion. These tactics have been around as long as humans have. Initially, persuasion played on the primal emotions of humans such as fear, hunger, greed, and lust. Over time, these techniques, while still the same at their core, have become more and more refined. The end result is a system of techniques that have become so subtle that the average individual can’t really figure out it’s there; that is, until they are clued in. However, it wasn’t until the early 20th century in which advertising, thanks to the emergence of the first mass media outlets, really began to take off. This new domain allowed folks such as Edward Bernays, known as the “father of public relations” to really begin using covert tactics for the purpose of getting their message across the general public. With the rise of the internet, access to a global audience has never been easier. This is why social media has become so prevalent over the last 10 years or so. We are literally in the midst of a revolution in which anyone with access to the internet can potentially get their message out there without much restriction. We are not quite sure what the future holds. But one thing is certain, however people communicate in the future, there will be a way in which manipulators will be able to use those means to their advantage. Manipulators evolve with the times. So, should you. That is why reading books such as these will allow you to gain insight into the mind of these individuals. In the end, the best way that you can guard yourself is to be clear and what to expect whenever you come into contact with the various types of media out there. The Effects of Dark Psychology The effects of dark psychology have a wide range. These can go from getting someone to buy one product to voting for a political candidate. It should be noted that we are not focusing entirely on mind control, that is the type of persuasion that can lead manipulators to order victims to kill people. We’ll be discussing how each of the techniques involved can create a response in you that will compel you to get the latest phone or purchase a specific brand of clothing. Moreover, these effects can essentially blind your sense to the true intentions of manipulators. In many ways, you will find that there is an attempt at your free will. Again, we’re not talking about cartoonish attempts to control your mind. We’re talking about playing with your feelings so that you can sign up for a cult or a political party. In some of the darkest twists that you can find, manipulators find ways of taking over people’s opinions and perspectives to the degree that a single organization can control an entire country. This can lead to the control of an entire social group by a reduced number of individuals. Of course, this isn’t something that happens overnight. But when you are aware of how manipulation can be used, you will find that it’s not quite as hard as it seems. Chapter 2: The Dark Triad ecause of the personality traits that are possessed by some people, it may be difficult to deal with them as they may always come off as disagreeable. For those who manage to get close to them, they may be volatile, domineering and very arrogant. However, if one can manage them carefully, it is possible to develop their strengths and neutralize those unsavory elements that are present in their behavior to bring team harmony back to life. There are, however, other behaviors and characteristics that can cause serious damage to a person when he displays a combination of these traits, which may be toxic. When he is a member of a team, he may undermine his colleagues in ways that could be lasting, and many people even go as far as poisoning or destroying the team. Psychologists in various studies have come up with three different traits that make up the dark triad. These traits are: Machiavellianism, narcissism and psychopathy. Let’s take a critical look at this dark triad to know the behaviors that are associated with them and look at the ways in which they may have impacts on work and social relationships. Understanding the Dark Triad It is not very likely for you to have heard the term “dark triad” anywhere around your workplace even though it is one of the buzzwords in the field of psychology that is used to refer to three different but related personality traits. Machiavellianism This word, as you may have rightly guessed, comes from the famous 16th century Italian politician and diplomat, Niccolo Machiavelli, who was notorious for his book, the Prince, written in 1513. The book was interpreted to be his way of endorsing the dark art of being cunning and deceitful when it comes to diplomacy. When it comes to Machiavellianism, duplicity, self interest, manipulation and a complete lack of emotions and morals are major characteristics. Those who suffer from Machiavellianism are usually very focused on their own selfish interests while they try to deceive, exploit and manipulate other people in order to achieve their own goals. A person with the Machiavellianism trait will possess and exhibit some or many of the following tendencies: e Focus on their personal interests and ambitions. e Give high priority to money and power above relationships. e Perceived by others as both charming and confident. e In order to get ahead, they tend to exploit and manipulate other people. e Tells lies and is deceitful when he thinks it is required. e Prone to flattery. e Lack values and principles. e Appear to be aloof or very hard to get to know. e Cynical of any form of goodness and morality. e They will easily cause others to harm to enable them to achieve their own means. e Has very low levels of empathy. ° Often very scared of commitment or any form of emotional attachment. ° Thanks to their calculative nature, they can come off as very patient people. e They will not easily reveal their true intentions. e Always prone to having casual sex. e Experts in reading social situations and other people. e Lack of warmth when it comes to social interactions. e They are often not aware of the possible consequences of their actions. e May have a little difficulty in finding/identifying their own emotions. The Machiavellianism Scale: This is a test that gives a score of up to a hundred. It consists of many questions and those who score anything above 60 are “high Machs” while those who score anything below 60 are “low Machs.” High Machs are typically very engrossed in their personal well being, as they are of the opinion that a person must be deceptive in order to be able to get ahead in life. They do not easily trust the potential goodness of other humans as they also think that it is naive to depend on other people. They, however, give priority to power above love and connection. Ultimately, they do not believe that there is a natural tendency for humans to be good. Unlike the high Mach, a low Mach is always empathetic to other people and is honest in their dealings with others. They are also very trusting and believe in the goodness of humanity. To a low Mach, if you can abide by good morals you will succeed in life. When a person scores too low on the Machiavellian scale, he tends to be too submissive and will agree too much with the opinions of others. Narcissism This takes its root from the Greek myth of Narcissus, which tells a story of a hunter that fell in love with his own reflection in a pool of water that he eventually drowns in. When it comes to people with the narcissistic trait, they are known to be arrogant, boastful, overly sensitive to criticism, selfish, and lack empathy. The Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD) is a mental disorder that has to do with a pattern of selfish and arrogant thoughts and behavior which comes with the lack of empathy and any form of consideration for others. Also, this disorder comes with an excessive craving for admiration. People who are living with NPD are often described as cocky, selfish, manipulative, patronizing and demanding. These attributes are often reflected in all the areas of the life of a narcissist from work, friendship, family, to intimate relationships. Those with this disorder do not find it easy to change their behavior as they are typically always resistant to change their behavior even though it is causing a lot of problems for them. They usually tend to turn to other people to put the blame on, and because of their overly sensitive nature they react badly to criticism in the slightest form or any sort of disagreement or perceived slight on their person. They identify all these as an attack. When a person is in the life of a narcissist, they tend to just go along with them instead of having to face their coldness and rage. The following are the symptoms of narcissism: e A grandiose sense of self importance/self worth. e Lives in a world of fantasy which gives support to their delusions of grandeur. e Ina constant quest for praise and admiration. e An exaggerated sense of entitlement. e Often demeans, bullies, belittles and intimidates other people. The type of self love that is exhibited by narcissists is not the genuine type, as their quest for admiration is always driven by their need to shield their insecurities. In fact, the narcissistic personality is the most insecure of the dark triad. For a narcissist, there is a weakness that they wish to shield. So, in order to accurately shield this weakness, they turn to others to boost their self image. To do this, they must put in a lot of mental and physical work, and it is in this that his dysfunctional attitudes begin to show itself. Psychopathy This personality trait has to do with the lack of both empathy and remorse. It is also characterized by antisocial behavior, as well as a manipulative and volatile attitude. A good point to note is the fact that there is no delineation between the traits of being psychopathic and being a psychopath when it comes to the common association of the trait with criminal violence. Although the exact causes of psychopathy are not known, it is said to likely be a combination of genetics, environmental and interpersonal factors. The genetic influence, for example, is suggested by the fact that children whose parents are psychopaths are likely to be psychopaths too. Also, the early life experiences of some people contribute to the increase in the risk of becoming a psychopath. Other factors that may lead to psychopathy includes poor parenting whereby a parent focuses on punishing the child more than they reward them. The abuse of substances by parents, separation, neglecting a child or physical abuse are other risk factors that may contribute to becoming a psychopath. The Hare Psychopathy Checklist Revised is commonly used to identify psychopaths. This checklist identifies and makes use of the following symptoms and signs of psychopathy: e A grandiose sense of self worth. e A constant craving for stimulation. e Superficial charm and glibness. e Being a pathological liar. e Being cunning and manipulative. e Absolute lack of remorse or guilt. e Absence of empathy exhibited by the callousness. e Lack of deep emotions. e Living a parasitic lifestyle by using other people. Lack of control over one's behavior. Sexual promiscuity. Early signs of behavioral problems. Absence of realistic long term goals. Easily acts on impulse. Irresponsible behavior. Blaming others for one’s own faults and not accepting responsibility. Having several marital relationships. Delinquency at a young age. Tends to revoke a conditional release. Criminal tendencies/acts in several areas of life (criminally versatile). Chapter 3: Emotional Manipulation What Is Emotional Manipulation? ow would you feel or react when you realize that for the longest time you had been acting out of the script of someone else? That is, you have been in control of your own actions and also your life as a whole. If it sounds scary and probably annoying, that is what emotional manipulation is all about. While a lot of people talk about emotional manipulation, there are still many who don’t know what it is all about. Emotional manipulation, or sometimes called psychological manipulation or “mind effing” is used to refer to the behavior which is intended to change the attitude as well as the behavior of other people by using deceptive, devious and sometimes abusive means. The manipulator psychologically or socially influences their victims to respond or behave to situations or issues in a manner that is unoriginal to their victims but which suits their purpose. This is classic manipulation because while you are acting out of that person’s script, you will think that you are still yourself. Emotional manipulation usually doesn’t involve using force but has a lot to do with playing with someone’s emotions and mind (psychological) to exploit them. It’s very hard to credit this concept with advantages if any, because of the covert nature of the work that goes into it and also the end results. Emotional manipulation compares to when someone uses what belongs to you to feed their own desires but in a covert manner and without your permission. While the manipulator acting in secrecy is definitely an issue, the biggest issue is when the manipulator makes you do things you wouldn’t normally do or things that don’t consider as good, or you seriously object to. Usually, when a person is ignorant of the tactics or techniques that the manipulator is using on them, they may not be able to break loose from the spell. They will keep convincing themselves that they are in charge of their life when they are actually not. But knowing the techniques can easily make them identify when they are being used. And while emotional manipulation is generally considered a bad thing, there may be times when you will need it to get what you want from people who have not been very cooperative with you and having knowledge of the tactics used would go a long way in helping you in such situations. Basically, emotional manipulators identify their victim’s psychological weak points and then work on them. This is only wise because if one makes a mistake of manipulating the other where they are the strongest, the manipulator will fail before they even begin. Expert manipulators look at an aspect that makes their victim vulnerable and work through that. The best practical tactics and techniques to emotionally manipulate others We have discussed tactics that manipulators use to manipulate their victims psychologically. While it is just the same thing, the following tactics are very specific to emotional manipulation. These tactics are not just limited to the ones discussed since every other day; manipulators are orchestrating new ways to get what they want from people. 1. Projection Projection is a diversionary tactic that manipulators employ to shift their shortcomings or deficiencies to another person. Instead of accepting responsibility for their errors, they would rather make another person take the blame. It is a psychologically abusive tactic that aims at taking the burden of guilt off their shoulders and mounting it onto someone else’s. The main motive here is to paint themselves clean, and the other person looks dirty and unfortunate. However, in a lousy situation, the manipulators are not usually the only ones to blame. It is not uncommon to encounter individuals like this once in a while. The moment a problem or defect is identified somewhere they are, such kinds of people are quick to find a victim on whom to lay the entire blame on. For example, a lazy employee who hasn’t been a good performer at their place of work, and also, the company where he works is not doing well. Being an emotional manipulator, the lazy employee will blame the company’s management as a reason for the loss. You will find them saying that the management has been ineffective or incompetent, and in the process, he leaves his own laziness out, which is actually of the main reason the company is in financial woes. Such kinds of people exist in intimate relationships. For example, instead of a partner admitting their need for intimacy, they would turn things around and accuse the other partner of being too clingy and also that they are only doing the other a favor. Their main aim is to appear stronger when they are actually the weaker ones. This manipulative tactic is also common in people who are quick to notice and point out the wrong in others. But in actuality, they are projecting their negative selves. 2. Intimidation To intimidate is to frighten or overawe another person, especially to make them do what one wants. Emotional manipulators usually apply the technique of intimidation to silence people who they consider a threat to them. In the case of a confrontation, they would look at the other into the eyes and with strange body language so that they can induce fear and distract their victims from their train of thought and make them end the debate. Emotional manipulators use this tactic to victims who are easily frightened or cajoled. As we have mentioned many times before, manipulators are very skilled at identifying the weak points of their victims and use that to exercise control on them. Once they realize that you are easily frightened, using intimidation and threats are some of the techniques they would constantly use on you. If someone exercises this manipulation on you, the best way to get out of it is by overcoming your fears and learning to stand up for yourself when intimidated. In fact, preventing yourself from revealing your weaknesses or fears to someone you can’t trust is one of the precautionary moves you can take to avoid such situations. 3. Magnifying their own problems while diminishing that of others This is also another covert emotional manipulation tactic. Emotional manipulators start by pretending that they are sorry for the things that you are going through, and while at it, they may also put on a show of short lived empathy. This is usually a ruse to hide their true intentions. But soon after, they would quickly bring up their own problems or challenges and magnify them so much that yours end up looking insignificant. One that this manipulative can be identified is when the other person always remember they have a problem the moment you bring up your own. Instead of helping you find a solution, they would rather bring up their own and start discussing it endlessly. This unwarranted comparison can be both frustrating and annoying because it denies you the sympathy that you so much need at that point. Also, it can even make you look or feel stupid to have raised your issue at that moment. In the end, they succeed in making you feel like you are intolerant; at the end of the day, your problems are not the worst. 4. Intellectual bullying Overwhelming someone with intellectual facts is one of a kind tactic that people use to manipulate others. Don’t get it wrong though, they may not always be accurate in what they are quoting but what they do know is that the other person doesn’t have access to or a chance to verify what is being said as valid. This way, they are able to place themselves before the other as an authority of some kind in order to have a way with them. This emotional manipulation tactic is common at point of sales or in financial institutions. Because they are sweet talkers and you can’t confirm their alleged claims, you may end up falling for their tactics unknowingly. One of the ways of avoiding to fall in this trap is knowledge; that is, being informed. You don’t necessarily have to know everything but strive to know something about everything. 5. Name calling One of the character traits of emotional manipulators is that they have an exalted opinion of themselves that is usually false. To them, other people are never right while they are never wrong. In fact, most emotional manipulators have been said to be narcissists. Therefore, when you are about to challenge their ego by putting their thoughts and opinions into question, be prepared to be called more names other than those in your birth certificate. To be frank, if you haven’t learned to develop tough skin by now, it would be easy for you to succumb to manipulation, especially out of annoyance. It is never fun to be called names like an idiot, troublemaker, fanatic, extremist, or any other name or title. The main goal that the manipulators try to achieve by doing this is to dirty your intentions and end up silencing you. 6. Conditioning Conditioning is a psychological training method of an animal towards a particular taste or trait that the trainer wants. Now imagine that on a human being. Of course, the manipulator would do this secretly. Through emotional manipulation, the victim is the one being “trained” by the manipulator. The idea here is to make the victim do away with their initial values and instead embrace those of the manipulator. For example, if a victim values honesty, then the manipulator would present anything good in life as dishonest. That way, the victim will end up associating honesty with a set of wrong values. The main reason that manipulators do this is so that the victim fails to proceed further and might even end up being disgraced. 7. Gossiping and stalking Every emotional manipulation tactic’s main aim is to control a person. However, when manipulators find it hard to control their targeted victim, they look for other ways to achieve that by controlling how other people view or see the victim. This can be achieved by spreading false information behind the victim’s back and other times monitoring their movements. The idea here is to not only give people a bad impression about the victim but to also intimidate them. For example, when a partner hints at ending a relationship due to the other partner’s bad habits, the other partner would go around spreading lies. The intention behind this is to get people to generally dislike the victimized partner due to the lies being spread instead of people getting to know the truth. 8. Bad surprises It is nice to be surprised once in a while, especially from a loved one. But surprises from an emotional manipulator comes differently; they are used as a tool to throw their victim’s off balance. A manipulative person would keep a promise only to say at the last moment that it won’t be possible. The main aim here is for the manipulator to get a psychological advantage over the victim by putting them in a situation where they can’t do anything but yield to their demands. At that last moment, when the victim doesn’t have any other option, the manipulator would bring out their egoistic demands that the victim would have no option but to meet them. This tactic is common among business people, and the Okey to staying out of it is to reach a legal agreement before signing a deal. 9. Personality marketing This tactic involves a person selling their alleged good qualities to another before they even get to know them personally. When the manipulative person here realizes the qualities that their targeted victim wants to associate with, they come sneakily blowing their own trumpets and marketing those qualities the victims prefer. This is a technique commonly used by politicians. They identify the qualities that their voters want in a leader and market themselves like that. It is only after they have been voted in the office that they would start showing their true colors. 10. Demeaning sarcasm While making it look like a joke, manipulators would mention things that their victim is struggling with in an underhanded way. This is meant to create feelings of insecurity to the victim and eventually overpowering them. Manipulators usually apply this tactic when they feel like their victim is getting too much recognition or attention. Demeaning sarcasm is done when a person cracks jokes about some struggles or failures in another person’s life like a failed exam or marriage. Such things aren’t anywhere near funny, but manipulators will make jokes out of them. While it may appear that it is just clowning, what the manipulator is trying to achieve is to make other people realize that the victim isn’t perfect or they aren’t worth as much as other people thought. 11. Triangulation This emotional manipulation tactic is very common in romantic relationships. It is also one of the emotional narcissists’ leading characteristics. The idea here is for the manipulator to validate their own selfish and wrongdoings towards their victim by making recourse to another party’s act. For example, a victim would be abused, and then when making a fuss, the abuser, without apologizing or admitting their wrong, would then direct the attention to another friend of the victim who was slapped by a partner and didn’t make a fuss about it. The main intention here is to make the victim look like they are overreacting and also the abuser or manipulator would technically be validating their action. The principle of triangulation is to divert the victim’s attention by comparing an upsetting event of a third party to justify their current wrongdoing. 12. Boundary testing Boundary testing is when manipulators test their victims to see how far they can go in crossing the victim’s line before they trespass the victim’s personal boundary. They cross one line at a time until they get deeper into their victim’s head. This is a very common tactic among abusers. First, they would talk condescendingly to the victim, when they show “excessive understanding” the next time they would slap them and if the victim accommodates that as well, it won’t be very long after that when they would turn into a punching bag. The reason this tactic succeeds is the victim choosing to show empathy rather than stand up to themselves. Narcissists, the most chronic emotional manipulators thrive in this. Their main concern isn’t empathy but rather the consequences of their actions. Therefore, the more they succeed in decapitating their victim, and nothing happens, the more they move a notch higher. 13. Judging others This is one of those emotional manipulation tactics that is done openly; anyone else apart from the victim knows and sees it. The manipulator would deliberately pick on their victim, especially when they know that there is nothing the victim can do right away. The most egoistic and self centered emotional manipulators are the ones who display this characteristic very often. They would keep bringing out their victim’s fault and brush aside their good efforts so that other people would view them negatively. Also, this tactic helps fuel the manipulators' ego because the more they judge the victim, the more they are portraying themselves as, the better one. The victim can save themselves from this tactic by severing ties with the manipulator and avoid showing considerations of any sort. Chapter 4: Deal with Manipulators y now there are many things which we are clear of in terms of a manipulator, their techniques, characteristics, also about covert manipulation and dark persuasion. All these things are practical and important to know especially when you deal with numerous kinds of people every day. All of us can be manipulative certain times, but what matters is the reason for manipulation is positive or negative. It becomes really crucial for you to know and understand who is trying to manipulate you and trying to convince you for doing something that you are not interested in. Manipulative people always facade your interest as theirs. Manipulators purpose is to shake your confidence to the extent that to make themselves strong they would do whatever the manipulator says. They use all the possible manners to attract you and be with you, they would do everything possible to take benefit from you. If not by the love they also use other tactics to get the work done such as by being pushy or threatening you. It is very substantial to understand these manipulative people before time or you should beware of the steps to take to handle them or how to maintain distance from them. There are also times when you get addicted to emotional manipulators and it becomes difficult for you to get rid of them. If a situation like this ever occurs, you should always ask yourself that do you remain frustrated, angry, dissatisfied or guilty because of that person or is there some other reason. If the answer is yes, you would still feel tough to stay away from that person, but you should face it and think that you can do it. These people are very magnetic and know how to keep you attracted towards themselves. Manipulators are very good at judging you, so they know when to joke with you and how much of it can you handle and when to stop, they have this miraculous sense in them which keeps you attached with them. This does not mean that they are thinking about you, it is just that they know when and how to take the advantage. When they achieve what they were looking for they forget your needs and just focus on their health and requirements. And the worst part about them is that if you do not meet their needs and demands, they might show up their real side of anger and aggression. Also, they make you so bound to themselves that you feel that you are so bound to them that you cannot do anything without their validation or approval, which is what their purpose is. The next thing that they take care of is that they know how much to give and take so that it does not come too much on them. So, first, let us understand and know about some practical tips to deal with manipulative people 1) Find out if they are using forceful behavior These people can get the work done by any means be it love, threat, indirect ways, by being forceful too. They might even threaten you that if you do not do what they want, then they would harm you in other ways so that they can gain control over you. They might do this to stop you doing certain things or do a certain task for them. Therefore, you should know how to say no to them as once to do something for them, they can always threaten you. The only way to keep them happy is by fulfilling what they want, so make sure that you say them a no if it is something that you do not wish to do. This is the most practical way of getting rid of them in the start only as once you entertain them, they would always trouble you with something or the other. 2) Do not compromise Guilt is both powerful and useless emotion. It is powerful because it can lead you to change your mind and feel bad for something. It is useless when manipulators unnecessary blame you for something which is not your fault. Guilt is a tool which the manipulators use very much, they might use it to make you feel guilty for your past mistakes or failures or not making them happy or agreeing to what they say. Even when you feel good about yourself or confident, they would have a problem with that and might ask you to stop feeling overconfident about yourself. They would never motivate you for anything instead would try and generate doubt in you regarding your skills and abilities. The only solution for this is being confident and stop feeling guilty; it is your life and trust yourself and your abilities instead of thinking of others comments. Have self belief and stop compromising on anything, trust yourself and move further. 3) See if they overdo things You must have observed this in many people that they do something small for you and show that they have done something huge for you. They would expect you to return the favor and if you do not, they would start complaining. They can go to any extent to gain your attention. They might show you fake tears and say that they feel lonely or unloved. Do not let them fool you as they only know is to lower down your self esteem. You should have your own self respect and face them by clearing out your expectations and what you can give. This would make a clear understanding between both of you and they will also have a clear understanding that you cannot be insulted or humiliated by them. 4) Take new opportunities People who do not want you to be successful would always want you to put your eggs in one basket only. Manipulators would always want that you stick around one opportunity all your life. They would always say that why are you being so greedy, just be content with what you have. But in contemporary times, this statement does not work. It is vital for you to grow and look for new opportunities. Manipulators are very insecure and jealous, so they would want you to stay at the same place where they feel you are secured. But you should listen to yourself and take your own decisions as they might call you selfish or too much arrogant and you might feel that you are being heartless by not listening to them. They would want you to be dependent on them and stay less successful than them. The only way to get out of all this is by achieving what you want, look for new jobs, start a business if you want and make new friends. This would make you more confident inside and also give you the courage to fight them. 5) They might use charm to impress They might act very sweet and use their charm so that you could not say no to their request. This is the unique way to make you feel burdened so that it becomes difficult for you to reject their request. For example, they might ask you for a tea or coffee and then while talking they might ask for a favor, which they might be tough for you to straight away say no. Not even at the office even at times on a personal level, you face this. Such as by the husband might ask for his wife to go shopping when they want to go out with their friends. But the only practical way of getting rid of this kind of situations is by being assertive and saying no. It might be difficult for you at that time but it would make your life easy and sorted. 6) Ignorance This is the key to stay happy and move on. When it comes to manipulators they are always meant to be ignored, as they deserve it. These people play dirty tricks with you by holding you accountable for things which you have not done, never taking accountability, do not act as they promise and try by all means to make you feel guilty. You might think that you can talk it out with them and solve it but it would be a waste of time. If you would try to correct them, they would instead entangle you in their conversation and you would again be in their trap. Their major tactic is that if you cannot convince, then confuse them, so they work on this principle and confuse you. So, the only thing you should do is ignore them completely. If you cannot ignore them fully as they are your boss or subordinates, then try to walk off where they are standing, do not respond much when they speak and find another way of getting your work done if possible. 7) Are they handling facts perfectly They would try to mould the facts shown by you by saying that they know everything and try to change the numbers according to their requirements. This clearly means that they are trying to fool you and faking that they know the statistics but actually they are trying to act clever. They also try to keep some important information to them so that only they use it and you do not. They also try to play smart by telling you some useless information in such a manner that it is very productive and can be used wisely in the project. So, the solution to this is do not believe in whatever they say, double check the information through your sources. Do not go according to their information if you have any doubt on their intent. 8) Stop taking permission The major issue with people is that they think that it is mandatory to take permission for everything and they get used to it. We are habitual of taking permissions since our childhood days, such as asking our parents to go out with friends, asking the teacher if you can go out and play, as an employee you ask your boss for leave, etc. This makes you so much used to it that you forget making your own decisions and understand what is right and wrong for you. This habit makes your confidence low and you become afraid of talking in front of others and keeping your opinion. The best solution to this is by doing what you like and makes you feel good. Stop thinking about others and making them comfortable. Make your choice today and remove yourself from the trap of permission and live freely. This must have made very clear to you that how can you deal with manipulative people. Just remember that manipulators have absolutely no right to lead your life and cannot make you do what you do not want to do. You can make mistakes without any guilt and learn from them. Just cut people like these from your life and stay with like minded people who make and keep you happy. Chapter 5: Characteristics of Manipulative People ne of the most important things to consider in this discussion is how manipulators select their victims. A victim, by definition, is the recipient of the manipulator’s actions. Therefore, the victim suffers negative consequences from the behavioral patterns exhibited by the manipulator. On the whole, victim selection is generally random. This means that manipulators will simply sniff around looking for someone they can take advantage of. When there is a greater amount of premeditation in the selection of a victim, then we might be dealing with a psychopath. As such, these individuals might make more careful study as to the type of person they seek to attack. Nevertheless, most manipulators will simply seek out those who are closest to them. This is why family tends to be the first target on a manipulator’s radar. Generally speaking, manipulators look for weak individuals whom they feel won’t be able to put up a fight. This means that for one reason or another, the victim is powerless to stop them. When you think of physical violence, this is one of the main criteria that goes into the selection of a victim. On a deeper, more emotional level, manipulators will seek out people who stand to lose quite a bit more than the manipulator. Think about that for a moment. Let’s go back to the example pertaining to the workers who must deal with a manipulative boss. In the end, the workers need the job far more than the boss does. If anything, the boss manipulates the employees more for personal pleasure than a logical business reason. Consequently, the workers are faced with a dilemma: they either put up with the manipulation or find another job. The ultimate objective of the manipulator is to subdue their victims to the point where they will offer resistance to the manipulator’s tactics. This means that the victim eventually becomes complicit in the manipulator’s behavior. Sure, there are instances where the victim is unable to extricate themselves from the abusive situation they are in. In such cases, the victim can only hope to endure the situation until a time comes when they are able to finally get out. Highly skilled manipulators will take the time to scout for potential victims. This occurs when a manipulator is able to identify the choice traits they are looking to find in their victims. As such, they will scout their surroundings and places they perceive will have the highest number of vulnerable individuals. That is why it’s always a good idea to be skeptical of someone you don’t really know in a place that you often go to. You never know who you might be dealing with. Signs of a Manipulative Partner One of the objectives on the mind of a manipulator might be to find a partner they can manipulate. This may occur either as a conscious behavior or an instinctive one. In the event of instinctive behavior, you can assume that the manipulator is not acting out of malice, but rather out of their own sheer desire. When you consider a conscious choice on the part of the manipulator, then you might actually be dealing with an evil individual who has a hidden agenda. So, it is important to recognize the warning signs before it’s too late. On the whole, manipulators can be easily spotted in romantic relationships by the subtle hints and lapses they show. For example, they appear to be Sweet and attentive, but suddenly change and appear to be disconnected. You can tell this by seeing in the way they pay attention to your conversation. Also, they might be very polite and caring but suddenly react abruptly when something that they don’t like happens. These are very subtle signs that you are dealing with someone who might not be entirely forthcoming. But the red flags get worse when you’re dealing with someone who is jealous and possessive. This can begin with incessant text messages and calls. It’s a progressive matter; they start off by increasing the number of calls and texts until you find that they are controlling everything you do. Eventually, they expect a tally and report of all the things you do. In addition, a manipulative partner will strive to find out things which are negative, embarrassing or even traumatic about your past. Then, they will use that every time they can. For instance, a manipulator may use their partner’s weight as a means of shaming. They will use this to coax their partner to comply; after all, “no one will love you as much as I do.” These types of statements are a clear indication that there is a manipulation attempt. These red flags are important to keep in mind as they can quickly degenerate into an abusive relationship. Highly skilled manipulators will make the transition so subtle that the victim won’t even notice the relationship is degrading to that level. In the end, all the victim can feel is the effects of the abuse. How to Know You Are Being Targeted It can be hard to know if you are being targeted by a manipulator. Perhaps the easiest way to go about this is to confront the manipulator. If you happen to run into someone who is overly friendly, then this ought to be a red flag for you. Also, if you happen to be surrounded by people who only remember you every time they need something from you, then you know you’re definitely being targeted. Unless you know a person well, it’s always a good rule of thumb to keep an eye out on everyone. While this may seem like paranoid behavior, the fact of the matter is if you are able to be alert, the chances of being nabbed by manipulators are rather slim. Here are some practical tips: e Be wary of overly friendly strangers e Watch for offers and deals that are “too good to be true” e Keep an eye out for sudden mood swings e Watch out for contradicting behavior and words e Pay attention to the moment in which people approach you e Avoid responding to unsolicited advice These situations are all indicative of a manipulator trying to “test” you. If they find that you are responsive, then they may feel compelled to continue their advances until you give in to what they want. In the end, it’s usually best to just get away from these people. You may never have to openly engage them; all you may have to do is just move away from them. How to Deal with a Manipulator If you happen to find yourself dealing with a manipulator, here are three very important steps which you can take to help you better deal with this type of individual. 1. Try your best to get away from the situation. While there are circumstances in which getting away from a manipulator may be virtually impossible, it is the most recommended course of action to get away from them as far as possible. This will take away their opportunities to manipulate you. Moreover, if you can completely extricate yourself from a situation (such as finding a new job), then all the better. 2. Find out what they are using to manipulate you and then take it away from them. If you can identify what they are using against you, then you will be able to take that weapon away from them. In fact, you may even be able to use it against them. That will be a clear indicator to the manipulator that they can’t have their way with you any longer. 3. Know your rights. If you happen to be in an abusive relationship or situation, you have the right to seek help. This can be any form of help that may be available to you, but you must act on it. If you know you are being affected by a manipulative and even abusive person, but fail to say anything about it, you may never get the help you need. So, it’s important to speak up. 4. Avoid the blame game. Do not think for a second that this situation is your fault. Also, there is no need to blame the manipulator even though they are responsible for their actions. When you play the blame game, you are hurting yourself by making it seem that you are directly, or indirectly, responsible for what’s happened. So, even if you are the victim, it’s not your fault that this has happened to you. By the same token, the manipulator is not at fault for being a manipulator. However, they are responsible for their actions. . Know when to quit. If you choose to confront the manipulator, you need to know when you may need to get away from them. There is only so much energy you can spend on a person like this. Oftentimes, dealing with a manipulator becomes a war of attrition. So, your determination to win that war may leave you more spent, both physically and emotionally, than what you stand to gain. Toxic Relationships It’s also important to keep an eye out for toxic relationships. Such relationships can be defined as those that hurt you in one manner or another. When you are in a toxic relationship, you don’t feel fulfilled. In fact, it’s quite the opposite. You end up feeling hurt, fatigued and even confused about the nature of the relationship. Consider this situation: You are part of a social group in which your “friends” always pick you thereby making you the butt of all the jokes. This type of relationship does not fulfill your social needs. Rather, it makes you feel terrible about yourself. The same goes for family relationships. There are times when family dynamics are so toxic and dysfunctional that you don’t have any kind of semblance to what a normal family would be. All you have is a collection of patterns and behaviors that are designed to bring you down and even make you feel bad about yourself. When you recognize that you are in a toxic relationship, the only way around it is to get out. However, this can be really tough, for instance, when you are in a toxic marriage. Divorce is certainly an option but the cost of it may be very high. However, you need to assess if the price you are paying by staying in the relationship may be higher than the toll it would take on you to divorce. At the end of the day, you need to assess whether a relationship is worth keeping. Of course, it will never make sense for you to stay in a toxic relationship especially if it’s leaving you spent and fatigued. Relationships ought to bring out the best in all parties involved. So, if you find yourself in a toxic relationship, it’s imperative to assess your priorities and determine if this relationship really is worth keeping. Chapter 6: Understanding Dark Persuasion how we interact with others, leaning in to persuade people to keep talking while ignoring them in hopes that they will be persuaded to go away. We persuade others to help by asking them and pleading our case, or we persuade people to do something through suggesting it. What makes persuasion dark versus regular persuasion, and how does dark persuasion work? If you want to understand why dark persuasion is so manipulative, you must first understand what it entails, as well as how it differs from harmless persuasion. per happens everywhere in day to day life. It can be seen in Defining Dark Persuasion At its simplest, persuasion is the act of coaxing or influencing someone into doing or believing something that they did not do or believe prior. Think of asking someone to do something that would never have occurred to them before. Perhaps you ask your partner to help you carry something because it is too heavy, and your partner has not yet offered help. If your partner then decides to carry something for you, you have successfully persuaded them. There is nothing inherently manipulative or wrong about doing this—you are simply asking for help and your partner obliges. Dark persuasion, then, adds a level of darkness. The propensity for darkness is the propensity to doing things for one’s own selfish interest with no regard of what it may or may not do to those around the manipulator. They do not care if people get hurt, betrayed, or upset. The only thing that matters to people who have a propensity for darkness or dark psychology is that one’s own wants and needs are met. Taking those two definitions, of darkness and of persuasion, you can then infer that dark persuasion is the art of influencing people to act in a way that is primarily or only beneficial to the manipulator with no regard for those being manipulated. Anything that the manipulator attempts to get from others is selfishly motivated. This selfishness, this darkness, is what makes dark persuasion so dangerous or harmful to others. Persuasion vs. Dark Persuasion If persuasion is acceptable, but dark persuasion is harmful, what is the real difference, you may ask. The difference lies in the intention. Persuasion, by and large, does not seek to inflict harm, and if anything, often seeks to better both the person doing the persuading and the person being persuaded. Oftentimes when trying to persuade someone, you are doing so because you believe it would be better, and this is from a good spot, seeking to benefit the other person as well. You are not trying to convince the other person to do something for your own benefit, and only your own benefit. Ultimately, the one sided selfishness is what differentiates the two from each other. Persuasion is not necessary but can be, selfish, but dark persuasion always is. Dark persuasion is almost always one sided, though the other person may believe there is some sort of benefit to him or her as well. In contrast, persuasion often seeks to balance benefits of all involved, attempting to spread as much good as possible. All parties involved in normal persuasion usually benefit in some way, shape, or form, but only the manipulator benefits in dark persuasion. Dark persuasion does not concern itself with morality, whereas persuasion does. The dark persuader does not care about right or wrong, but the persuader does. How Dark Persuasion Works Persuasion, and therefore dark persuasion, works through seven elements. These elements enable you to influence other people, no matter whether you seek to genuinely persuade someone with the best of intentions or you wish to darkly persuade someone into the behavior you know they would not necessarily care for. Understanding these seven elements is crucial to understanding exactly how to persuade others. Reciprocity Reciprocity is the idea that when someone helps or gives you something, you should return the favor. Even if it is as simple as someone smiling at you, you should smile back. No matter how big or small, the favor should be returned. This typically works in everyone’s favor when everyone reciprocates, because everyone sees benefits. If Alice asks Brenda for help moving furniture in exchange for homemade cookies and Brenda agrees to do so, the next time that Brenda needs help with something, Alice is going to be more likely to volunteer or agree to help. We inherently want to help others who help us; it is part of our wiring as a social species. However, this idea of reciprocity also applies in dark persuasion. If you seek to tap into dark persuasion, you are going to seek to create a sense of obligation in your target. You will do something for the other person with the intent of cashing in on the favor you feel you are owed. Many people are likely to give in to this notion, as well, and will oftentimes, even if begrudgingly, attempt to reciprocate. The idea with dark manipulation is to offer a small favor, typically something that does not take much of your time or energy, and then shortly after, request a favor in return. The shorter the time between you doing a favor and asking for a favor, the more likely it is that the answer will be yes, even with favors that are exponentially larger. For example, if you offer to cover your friend’s coffee, insisting it is no big deal when you know that he is struggling with money while you are out, you can turn around and ask your friend to help you by babysitting all evening while you go out on a date with your spouse. The reciprocity is not even between the two—all you did was buy a cheap coffee, but you are asking your friend to give up several hours in return. Say your date is set to last four hours, and you spent $3.50 on the coffee: This is essentially paying your friend the equivalent of $0.88/hour if you were to calculate out work for pay. This may sound like a fantastic price to pay for childcare for you, but your friend ends up caring for your children for well below minimum wage, and is honestly, probably at a loss after factoring in food that the children will inevitably ask for during a four hour window. At this point, your friend, who is already struggling to make ends meet, actually lost some money in return for drinking a cheap mocha from a café. Consistency and Commitment Consistency is important within persuasion because of three key factors: It is valued, creates a schedule that can be used to manage all of one’s many responsibilities, and it can simplify situations that are otherwise difficult to juggle due to having a routine. This means that consistency, in effect, makes people’s daily tasks more streamlined. People are able to get through everything easier when they have a set routine that enables them to meet all of their responsibilities that has proven effective in the past. The consistency in routine allows for reliability as well. Someone who is consistent is typically also quite reliable because of his or her routine. Therefore, someone who is consistent becomes easy to persuade. One that person has agreed to do something for you, you can be certain they will follow through due to their own skills at self motivating to remain consistent. In dark persuasion, you can take this to mean that once someone who is consistent has said they will do something, they will motivate themselves to do so, even if, halfway through, they realize that it is something that they have no desire to do, or is something that does not quite line up with their own belief systems. Going hand in hand with consistency comes commitment. Those who are consistent typically follow through with commitments no matter what. They self motivate to get the job done due to their consistency. Those who have proven themselves consistent typically will continue to follow that pattern, believing remaining consistent and reliable is integral to which they are as a person. This self motivation is, in essence, a form of self persuasion. By simply getting a commitment, you may not even have to do the persuasion part; the other person will do the work for you. This means that once you bind this person to do something, it will almost absolutely happen. Commitments are valued and not taken lightly. Even if you do find that the other person is balking at the agreement and seeming as though he or she may back out of the arrangement, appealing to that commitment, reminding the other person that they had promised or otherwise committed him or herself to completing the commitment is often enough to keep them in line. Within dark persuasion, then, by earning a commission, particularly from someone consistent, you are able to then ensure that you do not have to work hard to hold the other person accountable. Ultimately, those interested in dark persuasion and covert manipulation seek to get results with the least amount of effort, so by getting someone that you know is consistent and dedicated to meeting commitments, you are able to lessen your workload. You know that you are not likely to need to nag at the other person to follow through, which means you do not have to do as much follow up work. Social Proof Social proof is, in essence, herd mentality. It is the idea that people feel the constraints of social pressure demanding that they act in a certain way. It is the feeling of being obligated to do something simply because society dictates that is the way things are done, particularly in situations in which someone is unfamiliar. When unsure about the situation, people tend to follow the lead of those around them, feeling the pressure to conform. They assume that those around them, who seem to be moving around seamlessly, know what is supposed to be done, and therefore decide to mimic them in hopes of behaving appropriately. This phenomenon is even more pronounced when the individual who is unsure about the situation is able to closely relate to those who are acting, to whom the individual decides to conform. This can be seen in various experiments. In one such experiment, researchers joined a charity campaign that went door to door to get donations. When the list of donators had more names on it, the people being asked to donate were typically more likely to donate, particularly when the person being solicited recognized names on the donor list as being known neighbors, friends, or peers. This relates to persuasion because it involves what is seen as horizontal rather than vertical; at its core, this means that people are more likely to be influenced by their peers than their superiors. They are more likely to adopt the behaviors of people they identify with than those who have power. Within dark persuasion, then, this concept could be used to influence people to conform. If the predator were to fabricate a list of donators, for example, he would be able to better convince people to donate. Likewise, the predator could fabricate situations in which the target is alongside people who are acting the way the predator desires, allowing for the predator to influence the target’s actions without it ever becoming obvious. Likable Imagine that two people, one who you like, and the others who you do not, ask you to do the same thing. Who do you help, if anyone? The most likely answer is that you will help the person you like. People tend to agree to help people they like and are far more likely to say yes if they like the person attempting to persuade them. The question, then, is who do people like? How do people decide who the like and dislike? Ultimately, the answer involves three factors that determine how likable someone is to us: e People with whom we can identify closely e People who complement or flatter us e People who are willing to cooperate in order to attain similar, mutual goals or outcomes Understanding what people like and naturally gravitate toward gives manipulators an idea of how to act in order to get inside a desired target’s inner circle. The manipulator learns that, in order to get a yes, he or she should aim to be relatable, compliment the target, and identify common goals, even if those common goals are falsified by the manipulator to create some sort of semblance of a connection. Once those three standards have been met, the dark persuader is far more likely to get desired results when asking someone to do something. The persuader has tapped into unconscious biases and tendencies in order to get desired results. Authority By and large, people defer to authority and are more likely to do whatever someone asks if they see clear signs of authority presented to them. For example, a person may listen to what a nurse has to say about care at home, but may not follow through. If that same person were told the same thing by a doctor whose lab coat declared them the head of the ER department, however, they would be far more likely to do as told. This is because the person unconsciously defers to higher authorities. In the person’s mind, the nurse may not be as worthy of being an authority as the doctor who is the head of the emergency room, even though the information provided is exactly the same. In terms of being able to persuade others, then, this implies that it is important to cue that the predator is an authority in some way. You can convince people to buy products if you have a business degree hanging on the wall, and you can sway someone by using your credentials with your name on nameplates, business cards, and other identifying items. Consider if someone talked to you about what you should do with your insurance on your car—would you be more inclined to listen to a random person in casual clothes, or someone wearing a shirt emblazoned with the logo of a popular, well known insurance company? The answer is the one who has identified themselves as a representative of an insurance company. You would assume they are an authority on the product if their shirt marks them as someone involved with the insurance business. The dark persuaders, then, could take this a step further. Either through misrepresenting experience, or even lying about credentials, they are able to be seen as more reliable. They may discuss some reason they have more working knowledge over a situation, and because of that, they should be seen as a default authority on the matter. Scarcity People always want what they cannot have. Because oftentimes, people see the proverbial grass is greener on the other side, by imposing scarcity on a product, demand goes up. If an unpopular item is being removed from a menu, people will suddenly want it more, until it is gone, at which point, that item that never sold well in the first place is suddenly missed. Many restaurants follow similar structures, offering items for a limited time only, although realistically, they would be able to produce enough to meet demand if they chose to. Hype for the item is built through the exclusive nature of it—because it is limited, more people want to try it before they lose the opportunity forever. When it comes to persuading others, then, keeping scarcity in mind can be particularly useful. Not only should a predator make sure to tout benefits toward what people can gain by going along with the predator’s plan, but also what may be lost if the plan is not followed. Emphasizing the temporary nature of the deal, as well as what the loss of the deal will entail. People will be far more likely to go along with the plan if they feel like they stand to lose something if they do not do it. Chapter 7: Dark Persuasion Methods hen people attempt to give meaning to the concept of persuasion, their answers always come in different forms. While some may set their minds on the advertisements and commercials that are everywhere in modern society, urging one to patronize a certain product or service over another, others’ minds fall back to the politicians that try to change the minds of voters just to get one more vote at the polls. Both examples are correct as they are messages aimed at changing the perception of the subject. The point of diversion between normal persuasion and dark persuasion is that dark persuasion does not always have a moral justification. While a normal persuader may try to persuade someone for that person's own good, a dark persuader does so with motivations that aren't always good for the other person. They try to get a full grasp of understanding of the person they wish to persuade, and they take pains to do so because they know what the biggest motivation is. While persuasion always has moral implications, a dark persuader does not concern themselves with these implications. In fact, they are aware of them but choose to place their eyes on their objective(s) instead. Persuasion is a psychological phenomenon in the everyday life of a human being. It is either that you are the one trying to persuade someone else or you are being persuaded. What makes the difference between dark and normal is the motivation behind it. In mass media, politics, advertising and legal decisions, persuasion comes into play all the time. The outcome of practicing it in these fields is determined by ways of persuasion which will influence the subject of persuasion. There are some obvious and very crucial differences between persuasion and other types of mind control such as brainwashing and hypnosis. While these two require that the subject should be isolated in order to change their minds and identity, persuasion does not also require isolation. In order to get to the goal, manipulation is used on one person. Although persuasion can also be done on a single subject in order to get them to change their minds, there is also a possibility of using it on a large scale to change the minds of a whole group or even an entire society. For this reason, persuasion be a more effective mind control technique and perhaps more dangerous because it can change the minds of many people at the same time instead of the mind of just one person at a time. There are several people that make the mistake of thinking they have an immunity to the effects of persuasion because they are of the opinion that they will always be able to see every sales pitch that comes their way. They believe they will always be able to use logic to get a grasp of what is going on and then find a logical conclusion to it. Thanks to the fact that people are not always going to fall for everything they hear if they use logic, this may be true. It is also possible to avoid persuasion because the argument does not augur well with the person's beliefs no matter the strength of the argument. However, there are people who know how to use persuasive messages to encourage people to patronize the latest gadgets or products in the market. This act of persuasion is very subtle so the subject will not always identify it, so it is going to be quite hard for them to always be able to form an opinion about the information they are going to get. Every time persuasion is mentioned, it is very likely that one thinks of it in a bad light. This is because they tend to automatically think of a conman or salesman who is always trying to get them to change their perspective and who will eventually push them until this change is achieved. While dark persuasion is prominent in sales and conning practices, there are also ways that persuasion can be used for good, like in diplomatic relations between international bodies or in public service campaigns. The difference only lies in the way the process of persuasion is brought to play. Dark Persuasion Techniques When a person is willing to change the mind of their subject by persuading them to do something that is contrary to their initial state of mind, the persuader is going to have some well laid out techniques to help them achieve their goals. Each day that passes, the target is going to face different types of persuasion. For food makers, their goal will be to get their target to try out their new recipes or have them stick to the old ones, while studios will flash their latest blockbuster movies on the faces of their targets. Whatever the case may be or whatever product they are selling, their main aim is to make more sales and that is why they are trying to persuade you. They really couldn’t care less about how this will impact you and this is the reason why they must be very careful and skilled in the art of subtle persuasion to ensure that they do not tip you off or get you agitated. Since there are also many other brands trying to persuade you, they must find a unique way to impress their views on you. Due to the influence of persuasion on a wide range of people, the techniques used in it have been a subject of study for many years, dating back to ancient times. This is because influence is a very useful tool in the hands of a wide range of people. Starting from the early 20th century, the formal study of these techniques began to grow. Remember that the goal of trying to persuade people is to push a persuasive argument on an audience and have them convinced. They will then internalize this message and adopt it as their new attitude or even way of life. For this reason, there is a great need to discover the most successful persuasion techniques. Create a Need This is one of the most fruitful ways of getting a person to change their point of view or way of life. The person that is trying to persuade a target will either create a need or capitalize on a need that the subject already has. If this is done in a proper way, it has the potential of appealing a great deal to the target. What this means is that in order to be successful, the persuader must appeal to the needs that are of more importance to the target. This may be their need to fulfil their dreams or of boosting their self esteem. It may also be their want for love, shelter or food. This method will always work out well because there is no way the subject is not going to need any of these things, or in need of anything at all for that matter. Since there is no way the target isn’t going to have dreams and aspirations, the persuader will only have to find ways to make the victim understand how they can easily help the victim achieve those dreams. The persuader may also tell their target that the target will realize their dreams if they make certain alterations to their beliefs or perspective. Doing this, according to the persuader, will give the target a higher chance of achieving success. For example, a young man that wants to get intimate with a lady may tell her that he will help her improve her grades and finally make her parents proud by getting an A, but only if she becomes friends with him. While this lady may think that she has finally found the redemption she needs, the truth is that the young man isn’t very interested in how well she performs in school, her academics are only a bait for getting access to sex. Appealing to Social Needs The other technique that the persuader can use is identifying the target's social needs. While this may not yield as many results and the target's primary needs will, it is still an important tool in the hands of the persuader. There are people who are naturally drawn to crowds and desire to be wanted. They always want to have certain items, not because they need them but because it comes with certain prestige that makes them feel as though they belong to a higher class. The notion of appealing to the target's social needs is what is obtainable through many TV commercials where viewers are encouraged to buy a product so that they will not be “left behind.” When they can identify and appeal to the social needs of the target, the result is they are able to reach a new area of the target's interest. Making Use of Loaded Words and Images When a person is trying to persuade someone else, they must be careful with their choice of words as words can make all the difference. While there are many ways to say a thing, one way of saying it may be more potent than the other. When it has to do with persuasion, one of the most important things is knowing how to say the right thing at the right time. Words are always the most important tools in communication and knowing the right call to action words. Dark persuasion is one of the most powerful concepts of dark psychology, but sadly it is always overlooked and underestimated. This may be because, unlike the other methods of mind control, persuasion leaves the target with a choice. In the other mind control methods, the target is forced into submission and sometimes this is done by putting them in isolation so that at the end, they do not have any say in the outcome of the process. When it comes to persuasion, the chips are laid bare (although with an ulterior motive in dark persuasion) so that the target is left to make the decision that they think will suit them best. Chapter 8: What is NLP? (neuro) and language (linguistic) in a systemic way and the scripts N | euro Linguistic Programming has to do with the study of thoughts that run the life of an individual (programming). It deals with the understanding and the development of the mind and the entire understanding of the language of the mind in relation to the way it is designed to function and the ways in which it is molded by the personal experiences of an individual. It is simply a study of a person's subjective reality. A proper understanding of the language of the mind influences every aspect of a person’s life from his relationship with others to his communication skills with friends and clients to the general outcome of a person’s life. It is a holistic study that puts the spirit, body, past and present of an individual into consideration. As homo sapiens who are gifted with the ability to think, it is presumed that our most important function is the thought or the thinking function. NLP, however, brings one to the understanding of the fact that no thought process exists in a vacuum, as they are a product of a person's perspective. It has a presupposition of perception as reality and it holds that the things, we think are colored by the way we think. For different individuals there are different ways of thinking and interpreting reality. What NLP does is assist in the understanding of these various representational systems to help each person narrow down his own system. It helps in the understanding of the three different types of thinking patterns which are: e Visual: deals with both pictures and visual metaphors. e Auditory: sound (hearing). e Kinesthetic: deals with the five senses, as well as gut feelings. In NLP, a person is thought to take absolute control of his mind and ultimately his life. Unlike what is obtainable in psychoanalysis, which places its focus on “why,” NLP presents a more practical approach with its focus on the “how.” How NLP Works If you are just coming across this topic for the first time, NLP may appear or seem like magic or hypnosis. When a person is undergoing therapy, this topic digs deep into the unconscious mind of the patient and filters through different layers of beliefs and the person's approach or perception of life to deduce the early childhood experiences that are responsible for a behavioral pattern. In NLP, it is believed that everyone has the resources that are needed for positive changes in their own lives. The technique adopted here is meant to help in facilitating these changes. Usually, when NLP is taught, it is done in a pyramidal structure. However, the most advanced techniques are left for those multi thousand dollar seminars. An attempt to explain this complicated subject is to state that the NLPer (as those who use NLP will often call themselves) is always paying keen attention to the person they are working on/with. Usually, there is a large majority of NLPers that are therapists and they are very likely to be well meaning people. They achieve their aims by paying attention to those subtle cues like the movement of the eyes, flushing of the skin, dilation of the pupil and subtle nervous tics. It is easy for an NLP user to quickly determine the following: e The side of the brain that the person uses predominantly. e The sense (smell, sight, etc.) that is more dominant in a person’s brain. e ‘The way the person’s brain stores and makes use of information (the NLPer can deduce all this from the person’s eye movement). e When they are telling a lie or concocting information. When the NLP user has successfully gathered all this information, they begin to mimic the client in a slow and subtle manner by not only taking on their body language, but also by imitating their speech and mannerisms, so that they begin to talk with the language patterns that are aimed at targeting the primary senses of the client. They will typically fake the social cues that will easily make someone let their guard down so that they become very open and suggestible. For example, when a person’s sense of sight is their most dominant sense, the NLPer will use a language that is very laden with visual metaphors to speak with them. They will say things like: “do you see what I am talking about?” or “why not look at it this way?” For a person that has a more dominant sense of hearing, he will be approached with an auditory language like: “listen to me” or “I can hear where you’re coming from.” To create a rapport, the NLPer mirrors the body language and the linguistic patterns of the other person. This rapport is a mental and physiological state which a human being gets into when they lose guard of their social senses. It is done when they begin to feel like the other person who they are conversing with is just like them. Once the NLPer have achieved this rapport, they will take charge of the interaction by leading it in a mild and subtle manner. Thanks to the fact that they have already mirrored the other person, they will now begin to make some subtle changes in order to gain a certain influence on the behavior of the person. This is also combined with some similar subtle language patterns which lead to questions and a whole phase of some other techniques. At this point, the NLPer will be able to tweak and twist the person to whichever direction they so desire. This only happens if the other person can’t deduce that there is something going on because they assume everything that is occurring is happening organically or that they have given consent to everything. What this means is that it is quite hard to make use of NLP to get other people to act out of character, but it can be used to get a person to give responses within their normal range of character. This may come in the form of getting them to donate to a charitable cause, or finally making the decision they had been putting off or getting them to go home with you for the night if they had considered it at some previous point. At this point, what the NLP user seeks to do may be to either elicit or anchor. When they are eliciting, they make use of both leading and language to get the person to an emotional state of say, sadness. Once they can elicit this state, they can then lead it on with a physical cue by touching the other person's shoulder for example. According to theory, whenever the NLP user touches the person's shoulder in the same manner, the same emotional state will resurface if they do it again. However, this is only made possible by the successful conditioning of the other person. When undergoing NLP therapy, it is very possible for the therapist to adopt a content free approach, which means the therapist can work effectively without taking a critical look at the problem or without even knowing about the problem at all. This means that there is room for privacy for the client as the therapist does not really need to be told about whichever event took place or whatever issue happened in the past. Also, prior to the commencement of the therapy, there is an agreement which ensures that the therapist cannot disclose any information, hence the interaction between the therapist and the client remains confidential. In NLP, there is the belief in the need for the perfection of the nature of human creation, so every client is encouraged to recognize the sensitivity of the senses and make use of them in responding to specific problems. As a matter of fact, NLP also holds the belief that it is possible for the mind to find cures to diseases and sicknesses. The techniques employed by NLP have to do with a noninvasive, medicine free therapy that enables the client to find out new ways of handling emotional issues such as low self esteem, lack of confidence, anxiety and destructive relationship patterns. It is also a successful tool in effective bereavement counselling. With its roots in the field of behavioral science, which was developed by Skinner, Pavlov and Thorndike, NLP makes use of the combination physiology and the unconscious mind to bring about change in the thought process and ultimately the behavior of a person. The Importance of NLP Neuro Linguistic Programming is not only necessary for the understanding of a person's being, but it also helps in the understanding of the way an individual is. It helps a person to get deep into the root cause of the problem, as well as the foundation of their being. Here are some other reasons why NLP is important: e It helps people take responsibility for the things that they feel they may not be able to control. With the help of NLP, it is possible for a person to change the way they react to events of the past and have a certain level of control over their future. e It is very important for people to be aware of the body language of the members of their inner circle, as well as those who they seek to do business with. With NLP, it is possible to make use of language with both control and purpose, and with this it is possible to have control over your life. Remember, you cannot expect to make the same mistakes using the same mindset and hope to get different results. During an NLP session, the focus is placed entirely on the client as they are made the subject. This helps a lot because at the point where a person can deal with his or herself as a person, they gain more clarity into his or her dealings with other people. e It helps to improve finance, sales performance, marriage, health issues, parenting, customer service and every other aspect and phase of life. This is because it helps in the holistic improvement of an individual and when a person is whole, his interactions and relationship with himself and other people become whole as well. e It assists in targeting your beliefs, thoughts and values and helps with the targeting of a person’s brain functions, as well as developing certain behaviors. It also shapes the way these behaviors metamorphoses into habits and how the habits change to actions which in turn comes as results. NLP is applicable in different vocations and professions. This is a tool that is very important in the mastery of sales, personal development experts and self help, teaching, communication, parenting and other facets of life. Chapter 9: Toxic Relationships oughly speaking, a toxic relationship is any kind of relationship that causes harm to at least one of the parties involved. This is an important distinction to make as some toxic relationships affect only one of the parties (there needs to be at least two parties involved), or they may hurt all of the parties involved. The type of harm that occurs in this kind of relationship can be physical, emotional, or both. Most of the time, one type of harm is more prevalent than the other. In some cases, there may be a combination of both. Be that as it may, a toxic relationship will inflict harm on the parties involved in such a manner that it can leave lasting effects. Consider this example: In a marriage, one spouse is physically abusive to the other. The victim generally puts up with the abuse for any number of reasons. For argument’s sake, let’s assume that the victim does not leave the relationship out of fear. As such, the victimizer takes full advantage of this and looks to further submit their victim. In the end, the physical harm endured by the victim may lead to grave consequences such as death and serious bodily injury. In this example, one of the parties is the recipient of the abuse and thereby bears the brunt of the harm. The victimizer may suffer from emotional distress as a result of their action. For instance, the victimizer may feel guilty after inflicting the abuse upon their spouse, though such cases aren’t always the norm. Now, let’s consider a situation in which both of the spouses are in a toxic relationship and in which both suffer harm. In this scenario, there is no physical harm inflicted upon any of the spouses, but rather it is emotional harm. Both spouses are verbally abusive to one another. They frequently engage in shouting matches in which they say very nasty things to each other. The end result is emotional distress beyond anything either spouse has experienced. In this case, both parties play a dual role; that is, victim and victimizer. This naturally leads to a breakdown in the relationship which, most of the time, is irreparable. This means that the pattern of abuse will continue until the relationship itself ends. However, both partners may be so set in their ways that the thought of ending the relationship may seem inconceivable to them. The end result may be a pattern of abuse that lasts for years on end. How to Recognize a Toxic Relationship Generally speaking, any time you are in a relationship, whether it’s romantic, professional, family or friendship, and you are suffering any type of harm, that is, you are hurt in any way, at least on a consistent basis, then you are most likely in a toxic relationship. Some of the signs may be too subtle to tell. But if you consistently feel bad, in any way, then you may have to take a closer look at your relationship. Perhaps things aren’t so bad on the surface, but beneath the visible surface, there may lie a deep pattern of abuse. Let’s consider your workplace. If you find yourself working with colleagues who drag you down rather than spurring you to be your best, then you are most likely in a toxic workplace environment. If you add to that a boss who is demanding, overbearing and domineering, then you might as well get a new job. Think about it in this manner. If you get home absolutely spent at the end of your workday; if you feel like you have run a marathon; if you feel that you are emotionally drained, every single day, then you might very well be the victim of toxic relationships. Now, it’s one thing to have a tough job which is demanding and requires a high degree of physical and emotional conditioning. You can tell the difference because you feel that your job gives you a sense of purpose beyond the paycheck. But if you would rather go through a root canal rather than go to work, then it’s a safe bet that you are not in an ideal environment. Another telltale sign that you are in a toxic relationship is when you feel that you are giving more than you are getting. While this may be the manifestation of unfulfilled wishes (for instance, a narcissist may feel that they are not getting what they want in a relationship), an honest assessment of both your actions and those of the other parties may reveal that you are in a toxic relationship. It could very well be that others are simply taking advantage of you. Furthermore, toxic relationships are manifest when there is a clear benefit for one party as compared to other parties. For example, parents clearly derive a benefit from their children while the children themselves don’t receive the love and attention they need. This is generally seen in child stars. The parents reap the benefits of their child’s success while the child is neglected and forced to work. On the whole, toxic relationships are fairly obvious once you begin to peel back the onion. This assessment begins when you see that you are hurt in some manner, or you are not receiving any kind of benefit in the relationship. Moreover, if there is any kind of physical harm in a relationship, then it’s time to end it. Types of Toxic Relationships While the term “toxic relationship” tends to be seen as an umbrella term encompassing any kind of harmful relationship, the fact is that there are multiple variants of this type of relationship. The difference generally lies in the way the relationship is set up. So, there are relationships that are focused more on a romantic interest, whereas others are focused more on a professional setting. Toxic Romantic Relationships This type of toxic relationship can take on any number of facets. It is the only one we are going to explore in isolation as it is the one which is the most vulnerable to degenerating into a toxic, abusive interaction among both parties. In general terms, toxic romantic relationships tend to be broken from the beginning. As such, the foundations of the relationship are set up in such a way that there is hardly any semblance of what a normal romantic relationship would like. In theory, romantic relationships involve two individuals who profess affection and fondness for one another. This means that there is an affinity between both of them in such a way that they commit their time and energy to caring for each other. If a relationship is set up under those pretenses, then the chance of it surviving over time is far greater than if they are set up under any other type of pretenses. The situation now shifts dramatically when one of the parties in the relationship enters it with a hidden agenda. When this occurs, the relationship may be broken from the beginning. Then, there is the case in which a relationship deteriorates over time thereby leading to its toxicity. Roughly speaking, one, or both, parties in the relationship are somehow hurt by the dynamic that ensues. When this happens, resentment brews leading to potential animosity between the parties. At this point, the relationship may be beyond repair. In fact, the only solution may be to break up and move on. The situation gets further compounded when there is some type of physical harm involved. Natural, physical harm is extremely difficult to deal with as it could lead to serious injury or even death. That’s why it’s important to note that abuse in a romantic relationship can range from verbal aggression to physical harm. Everything that happens in between can be a sign that the victimizer, whether acting consciously or unconsciously, is looking to extract as much benefit for themselves as possible. As a result, the manifestation of blackmail, gaslighting, guilt or blame can be evident. As the abuse deepens, one or several of these phenomena may emerge. The victim may be left broken with their self esteem shattered in a million pieces. The victimizer may end up resenting themselves though unable to break the pattern that they have become accustomed to. Dependence Dependence is especially toxic when the victim is the party who sustains the dependency of the victimizer. To clearly exemplify this, think about a drug addict or alcoholic. The addict becomes dependent on their spouse, parents, siblings or friends especially when they are under the influence. When addiction takes over a person’s life, they may be unable to function in a traditional social context. For instance, they may depend on financial support as they are unable to work. If we assume an adult child who is financially dependent on their parents, the addiction may perpetuate this dependency on the parents. The relationship then becomes toxic for the parents especially if they are older and no longer able to work. In addition, the emotional toll that such a relationship can take on a person is truly exhausting. Dependence can also be seen at an emotional level. For instance, a person is completely dependent on their partner’s attention and validation. In this case, the dependent individual may be unable to function properly without having the full attention of their partner. This can be seen in jealous types (regardless of whether they are male or female). The jealous types will strive to control their partner’s every move so that they can feel safe and secure. Naturally, the relationship becomes toxic for the victim as they tend to feel suffocated and smothered by the relentless desire for attention from their partner. Narcissism This is one of the most toxic relationships you can be in. A narcissist will generally stop at nothing when looking to take full control over their partner’s life, or in the case of narcissistic parents, their children’s lives. Let’s explore narcissistic parents a bit further. Narcissistic parents are the kind that seek to control everything about their children’s lives. They will be eternally vigilant and overprotective. This attitude is not the product of genuine concern for their children’s wellbeing. Rather, it is a manifestation of their own insecurities. As a result, they need to be in full control of their children’s lives so that they can feel more at ease. Furthermore, narcissistic parents have a tendency to live vicariously through their children. This means that these types of parents will push their children into activities and areas in which they, the parents, failed in their own lives. As such, the parents are looking to realize their own dreams through their children. Hence, the support that these types of parents put into their children’s development is done more out of the desire to realize their own dreams rather than pursuing their children’s wishes and desires. Lastly, dealing with a narcissistic boss can be a terrible experience. A narcissistic boss is generally a micromanager and very slow to delegate any kind of responsibility or decision making power to anyone else. Thus, they are totally committed to supervising everything that is done while centralizing all decisions. Needless to say, this can be extremely frustrating while leaving employees with a profound sense of powerlessness. In the end, these types of bosses manage to alienate their employees to the point where they may no longer care about the work they are doing. The boss, on their end, may end up feeling completely exhausted, both physically and emotionally, as all of their energy is spent on trying to maintain control of everything around them. This type of relationship is completely toxic for all of those involved. Manipulation Manipulation in relationships can be subtle or quite overt. In some cases, manipulation occurs when the manipulator has a hidden agenda that they act upon. In other cases, the manipulator simply acts out instinctively without really being aware of what they are going to their victim. Regardless of the case, the manipulator uses their victim for whatever purpose suits them. In some of the most sordid cases, the manipulator may choose their victim out of sheer pleasure and enjoyment, that is, they take sadistic satisfaction in victimizing a vulnerable person. Manipulation can occur through blackmail, guilt, lying or even mind control techniques. The level of sophistication on the part of the manipulator may end up determining how well these techniques can work on their victim. Furthermore, when the victimizer gets bored or fulfills their purpose, the victim may very well be discarded. This is the type of attitude that manipulators with psychopathic tendencies might take. They may not have the slightest amount of compassion for their victim. As such, they will see their victims are disposable. One other thing about manipulation: when a victim becomes aware of the manipulation but does nothing to stop, they become complicit. In a manner of speaking, they become an enabler as they do not attempt to put an end to it. When this occurs, the victim may take pleasure in being victimized. This is a masochistic response that may evolve as a result of prolonged periods of exposure to the abuse and even torture. So, don’t be surprised if you happen to find people who actually enjoy being subjected to painful experiences. How to Avoid Toxic Relationships There are two ways of going about this: first, what to do when you are already in a toxic relationship, and second, how to avoid getting one in the first place. If you are in a toxic relationship, you need to assess how toxic the relationship really is. If you believe that it may be repaired, then it would be wise to talk with the other party to see if there is a possible resolution. However, if you feel that the relationship is seriously compromised, then you may need professional help in order to restore a healthy balance. On the other hand, if you believe that the relationship is beyond repair, then there may be no other way but out. Often, professional help may be of benefit, but repairing a toxic relationship requires the commitment of all parties involved. If any one of the partners is reluctant to work on the relationship, then there may be no solution to it. In addition, it is important to spot the red flags as they emerge. Here is a list of red flags to look out for: e Excessive control e Jealousy e Insecurity e Emotional dependence e Physical violence e Guilt e Hurtful comments e Passive aggressive attacks e Name calling e Constant blaming e Constant reminder of past mistakes Any of these red flags, should you spot them, ought to give you an indication that you might be in a toxic relationship. The sooner you spot them, the sooner you may be able to get out, or in the best of cases, repair the relationship. If you realize that you are, in fact, the manipulator, then you might be able to make amends and restore balance to your relationship. Chapter 10: Mirroring ave you ever sat in a restaurant and people watched? It can be quite amusing to sit back and watch all of the people out and about around you, attempting to identify how their relationships must be going by body language alone. Yes, it is quite possible to understand at the briefest glance at another how they get along. You can absolutely tell how much or how little people get along simply by watching them together and seeing how they naturally orient their bodies around each other. This simple skill is referred to as mirroring, and it is absolutely crucial if you want to be successful at influencing or persuading others. When you understand mirroring, you essentially have a built in system in which you can judge just how well people are likely to be willing to listen to you. You can tell if you are successful in developing rapport, and if you have not, you will be able to push the act of earning rapport along a little quicker. You can utilize mirroring in a wide range of ways that can absolutely be beneficial to you, and you can utilize it in ways that can be useful to others as well. What is Mirroring? First things first, you must learn what mirroring is. At the simplest, it is the human tendency to mirror what is happening around them when they feel a relationship to whatever it is that is around them. For example, if you look at an old married couple, they are likely to constantly be mirroring each other’s behaviors. It is essentially the ultimate culmination of empathy—the individuals are so bonded, so aware of each other and their behaviors, that they unconsciously mimic any behaviors that their partner does first. The two married people at the diner may both sip at their coffees at the same time as each other, or if one drinks, the other will follow shortly after. If one shifts in his seat, she will do so as well, always leaning to mirror the position her husband is in. If she brushes off something on her shoulder, he will unconsciously touch his shoulder as well. This act is known as mirroring, and it occurs in a wide range of circumstances. You do not necessarily have to be a married couple that has been together for decades for mirroring to be relevant, either—you can see it everywhere. The person interviewing you for a job may begin to mirror you when the interview is going well, or the person who thinks that you are attractive may mimic some of your behaviors as well. You can see these behaviors mimicked started quite early on in terms of how long people have been interacting as well—sometimes people will even hit it off right off the bat and begin mirroring each other, emphasizing the fact that they seemed to have clicked. Mirroring is essentially the ultimate form of flattery—it involves literally copying the other person because you like or love them so much. Children mirror their parents when learning how to behave in the world. Good friends often mirror each other. Salespeople wanting to win rapport, mirror people. No matter what the relationship is, if it is a positive one, there are likely mirroring behaviors, whether unconscious or not. Uses of Mirroring You may be wondering why something as simple as mimicry can actually be important to others, but it is actually one of the most fundamental parts of influence, persuasion, and manipulation. When you mirror someone, you can develop rapport. Rapport is essentially the measurement of your relationship with someone—if you have a good rapport with someone, you have developed some level of trust with them. The other person is likely to believe what you are saying if you develop rapport. However, if you have not yet developed rapport yet and you need the other person to listen to you, you can oftentimes artificially create that rapport through one simple task— mirroring. If you mirror the other person, you can essentially convince him to develop a rapport with you, whether it was something he wanted to develop on his own or whether you forced the point. By constantly mirroring the other person, you essentially send the signs to their brain that they need to like this person because this person is just like them. Remember the three key factors for likability? The first one was able to relate or identify with the other person. In this case, you are presenting yourself as easy to relate to simply because you want the other person to like you. With liking you comes rapport. With rapport comes trust, which you can use to convince the other person to buy cars, or do certain things that will benefit you. Building rapport even builds up the ability to be able to manipulate the other person—you need to be trustworthy for the other person to let you close enough to manipulate in the first place. How to Mirror Luckily for you, mirroring is quite easy to learn how to do. While it may seem awkward and unnatural at first, the more you practice it, the more natural it will become to you, and the more effective you can get at it. Remember, if you want to mirror someone, you will need to toe the line between too much and not enough. If you are too overt, the other person will catch on and will likely be more put off than convinced to like you. Take a look at these four steps so you can learn to mirror for yourself. Build up a Connection The first step when you are attempting to mirror someone is to start by building a connection somehow. If you do not feel the connection with the other person, they are not likely to be feeling a connection either. Keeping that in mind, you should begin to foster some sort of connection and rapport. This can be done with four simple steps on its own. e Fronting: This is the act of facing the other person entirely. You start with your body oriented toward them, directly facing the other person to give them your complete attention. e Eye contact: This is the tricky part—when you are making eye contact, you need to make sure that you get the right amount. e The triple nod: This does two things—it encourages the other person to keep speaking because the other person feels valued and listened to, and it makes the other person feel like you agree with them. It develops what is known as a yes set. The more you say yes, the more likely you are to develop a connection with the other person. e Fake it till you make it: At this point, you have spent a lot of time setting up the connection, and it is time for the moment of truth. You should imagine that the person is the most interesting in the world at that particular moment. You want to really believe that they are interesting to you. Then stop pretending—you should feel that they are actually interesting to you at this point. This is the birth of the connection you had been trying to establish. Pace and Volume Now, before you start mimicking their body language, start by paying attention to the other person’s vocal cues. You want to make sure you are speaking at the same speed as the other person. If they are a quick speaker, you should also speak quickly, and if they are a slower speaker, you should slow your own speaking pace down to match. From there, make sure you are also mimicking the volume. If they are louder, you should raise your own voice. If they are keeping their voice down, you should follow suit. These vocal cues are far easier to mimic undetected than the rest of the physical cues. The Punctuator Everyone has a punctuator they use for emphasis. It could be something like a hand gesture that is used every time they want to emphasize something, or it could be the way they raise their brows as they say the word they want to stress. No matter what the punctuator is, you should identify what it is and seek to mimic it at the moment. Now, oftentimes, this cue is entirely unconscious on the other person’s part, and as you begin to mimic it, the other person is likely to believe that you are on the same wavelength. This should really do it for you without making what you are doing obviously. The Moment of Truth Now, you are ready to test whether you have successfully built up the rapport you need. When you want to know if the other person has officially been connected to you, you should make some small action that is unrelated to what you are doing at that particular moment and see if the other person does it back. For example, if you are having a conversation about computers, you may reach up and rub your forehead for a split second. Watch and see if the other person also rubs at their forehead right after you. If they do, they have connected to you, and you can begin to move forward with your persuasive techniques. Chapter 11: Covert Manipulation overt emotional manipulation is something most people wish they never would become involved with, but by the time they realize they may be getting manipulated, the damage has already been done. It involves one person intentionally, systematically, and covertly removing as much power as possible from another person, instead of replacing it with control. The victim never knows it is happening, and the manipulator essentially gains near total control over the other person. When it is finally discovered, the individual who is being controlled realizes that he or she is lost—not realizing what has happened, confused about how their entire life has spiraled out of their own control and feeling as though they are stuck. What is Covert Emotional Manipulation? Covert emotional manipulation has three key parts: e Covert e Emotional e Manipulation Understanding all three of these parts will be necessary if you want to understand what happens within this type of manipulation. Before delving into how it is done or what techniques manipulators tend to prefer, you will first define all three of these key parts. Covert, at its simplest, means secret. It refers to how secretive the entire process is—the manipulator is able to install all of the strings necessary without detection, utilizing all sorts of methods that employ plausible deniability. This means that they do things that are intentionally ambiguous —they may be hurtful things, but when the victim calls the individual out on being so hurtful, the manipulator denies everything, claiming that the victim is far too sensitive about such things and needs to learn to relax a little. Emotional means that it will employ tactics whose success will hinge upon the ability to successfully use emotions. The emotions of choice that manipulators usually go for are fear and sadness, as both of these enable the manipulator to better control the victim. Essentially, the manipulator will cause the feeling of one of these emotions to use as a foundation for whatever behavior he may be attempting to manipulate or coerce out of the victim. Manipulation means that the manipulator is swaying the victim into doing something. The actions at that point are not done of the victim’s volition— there was some sort of coercion or force that occurred, whether through threats, fear, or anything else, and that allows for the manipulator to retain control. Essentially, with covert emotional manipulation, the manipulator is the puppet master, creating all sorts of invisible strings in the victim behind the scenes in ways that go entirely undetected. These strings allow for the emotional manipulation of the other person, which can then be used to the manipulator’s advantage as they extort, coerce, and force the victim into behaving to avoid intense emotional distress. How to Use Covert Emotional Manipulation When you want to use covert emotional manipulation, you must follow two major steps once your target has been primed and is open and receptive to these types of behaviors. You must first create emotions into the target, and then you must be able to exploit those emotions. If you can create and exploit the right emotions within someone, you can sway their behaviors into whatever results you hope to achieve. Typically, the easiest emotions to utilize for this process are fear, anxiety, or sadness. Guilt also works quite well as well—very little is as motivating as some intense guilt. Emotions for Manipulating Fear: When you feel fear or anxiety, you are typically expecting something negative to happen. Usually, you are tensed up, afraid, and waiting for the other shoe to drop, so whatever negative consequence or action that you are anticipating can happen. Usually, this is in response to some sort of threat or danger—you are certain you will be harmed if you are not careful. That fear or anxiety usually plays an important role in your emotional regulation and your survival —when you are afraid, you go into fight or flight response, meaning your body prepares to either fight back or run away. Blood is redirected away from unimportant areas, such as the extremities, and from the higher processing areas in the brain. This, unfortunately, means that your higher level thinking is impaired when you are afraid, and has the effect of leaving you far more susceptible to being convinced or swayed into doing something that you would not normally entertain. You act in fear, just wanting to make the fear or anxiety go away so you can return to your baseline feelings of calmness or happiness. Sadness: When you are sad, usually something bad has happened, and you are mourning or grieving something. You feel a profound loss of something and that hole that whatever it is you are missing hurts. In fact, sadness is a huge motivator for people—it encourages people to avoid repeating mistakes out of fear of losing something else. When you are sad, your mind and body are essentially telling you to not repeat whatever had just happened because it was bad. Of course, when people are sad, their rational minds are not working entirely—those who make decisions when sad are far more likely to be swayed by someone else. If the manipulator can get their target to fall into sadness, the target is more likely to go along with anything the manipulator says, simply wanting to be freed of the sadness that is overwhelming him or her. e Guilt: Guilt is what we feel when we fail to complete an obligation. Ultimately, we feel obligations to those we love and trust the most—it is a sort of way that we ensure that everyone we care about survives. We feel obligated to take care of our children, and that drives most mothers to get out of bed at 3 am when they hear their babies crying for milk, or when the kids are up at 5:30 on the dot, even on Saturday, begging for breakfast. Obligation is what makes you do selfless things for those you love. When you fail to meet those obligations, however, you feel guilt. That guilt lets you know that you failed, and those negative feelings are meant to make you not repeat that mistake again. After all, not meeting obligations could mean the difference between life and death in some situations, and the biological imperative wants you and those you share genes with to survive. When you feel guilty, you are likely to do whatever you can in order to get out from underneath it. Creating Emotions With your understanding of the easiest emotions to manipulate, you now need to take a look at how to instill those emotions in someone else. When you understand how to create an emotion within someone else with very little effort, you are able to make sure you can always control them. The easiest way to create an emotion in someone is to recognize that emotions are motivators—if you can figure out the right trigger, you can create the emotion. For example, if you need to make the person you are trying to control feel guilty in order to get them to do something for you, you would first ask them. When they say no, the trick here is to sigh, pretend to sadly accept the results while referencing how you know how much of a hassle what you are asking about is and that you remember how difficult it was when you did it for the other person. You are likely to hit some guilt buttons in response, triggering the feelings of guilt and therefore making it more likely to get what you want. On the other hand, if you wanted to create sadness, you could tell a story that you know has a sad result just to get the other person into the right frame of mind. For example, if you know the target has children, referring to children dying or getting hurt could get the other person into a sad mindset pretty quickly. This particular emotion is useful when attempting to raise money—appeal to the saddest part of the organization, showing pictures of the starving children that look like they are on the brink of death or the dogs with the sad eyes. The feelings will follow afterward. Exploiting Emotions With the feelings created, it is game time. You can finally begin to exploit them. If you really wanted to go to that game, but your spouse told you no, it is time to pull out the guilt cards. If you are trying to pass a sale on a certain car, appeal to safety features in the model you are pushing. While anger is not typically a very good one to intentionally create because those who are angry are typically less receptive to suggestions, it can have its uses, and if you notice that someone is angry, redirect that anger to someone or something else that will aid you in whatever it is you want. Why Use Covert Emotional Manipulation? Ultimately, there are several reasons for using covert emotional manipulation, and all of them are quite underhanded. Despite that, you may find something on this list that actually helps you somehow. Sales In sales, this can actually be a fantastic skill to utilize, so long as you make it a point to ensure you are selling what is beneficial to the clients that approach you and you do not sell items that have no use to the other person just to get the bonus or sales credit. Utilizing emotional manipulation can actually be quite useful if you believe the other person is making a bad decision and would be better served with some other purchase instead. Advertising Similar to sales, covert emotional manipulation runs rampant throughout various forms of advertising. Everything from the way the pages are formatted to what kinds of pictures are used, are put together in order to create an immersive experience, appealing to whatever emotions will best sell the product that is being advertised. Politics Politicians frequently can use this in order to distract from bigger issues at hand and to gain favor in crowds that might not have been so open without it. For example, they may be able to recognize ways that one group could be swayed, such as appealing to conservative older people with vows of sharing religion and being interested in maintaining said religion, or in siding with younger people through discussing ways to better the economy and protect those who are struggling. Getting What You Want One of the most common ways that covert emotional manipulation is used, however, is to get what you want. Typically, abusers will utilize it this way, seeking to install all sorts of emotional triggers in their victims and then pulling them whenever they see it necessary to get the right results. Covert Emotional Manipulation Tactics Now that you have developed a solid understanding of what covert emotional manipulation requires to be effective, as well as how the process works, you are ready to begin looking at several different tactics that are regularly used in a wide range of situations. Remember, not all of these will be appropriate to use in professional settings, such as in sales or in politics, but they are effective techniques. As you read through each of these, you will see how each seeks to cause an emotion and then subsequently take advantage of it shortly after. During this cycle, people are able to essentially control the emotional reactions of those around them. They are able to cause people to feel all sorts of things, through a wide range of skills, and utilize those skills to the fullest potential they have. Love Bombing and Rejection Perhaps one of the simplest tactics used, but still incredibly effective, is the love bomb and rejection cycle. With this technique, you essentially are repeatedly love bombing to addict the other person to you before suddenly withdrawing affection altogether. Love bombing refers to the tactic of showering someone in all sorts of lavish, meaningful affection, praise, and reinforcements. The purpose of this is to flood the body with all sorts of positive hormones, essentially mimicking the act of falling in love. As you constantly love on someone else, you are rapidly flooding their body with good hormones. As you do this, you are tricking them. Everyone feels good when they are showered with praise, after all—that praise can be incredibly reinforcing. The more the target feels the praise, the love, and the affection, the more thoroughly he or she will be addicted. Frequently, manipulators will use this carefully, appealing to everyone’s inherent desire to be loved and wanted. They will very carefully identify a target, choosing someone who they believe will be receptive to suck manipulation and act quickly. These people are suddenly pushing a whirlwind romance, driving the relationship forward as they do so. They encourage the other person to say that they love the manipulator as quickly as possible. They want the other person to be entirely and utterly intoxicated by the manipulator’s very presence, and constant praise and reinforcement is the way to do so. Through conditioning, the target associates the positive feelings created by the praise and reinforcement with the individual, even though the individual may be less than deserving of such association. When the target is thoroughly ensnared into the manipulator’s trap, the target’s threshold for dealing with unwarranted or unacceptable behavior is elevated—because the target feels as though he or she loves the manipulator, he or she is willing to accept far more from the manipulator than someone who was not essentially addicted to the person’s very presence. This is then tested in the rejection stage. Here, the manipulator will intentionally knock the target off of the elevated pedestal onto which he or she worked so hard to place the individual. Suddenly, the manipulator withdraws all sorts of affection, replacing it with scorn or disdain, and the target is suddenly shocked. Like a drug addict, desperate to score as soon as possible in any way possible, the target will do nearly anything necessary to get back into the good graces of the manipulator, craving those scraps of attention and affection and all the good feelings those scraps will bring. This cycle is repeated again and again, essentially keeping the individual target ensnared in a never ending cycle. The victim feels affection and wanted for a short period, only to be sent crashing back down through rejection and desperately attempting to climb back up the ranks. Reinforcement and Repetition Something that this has not yet touched upon is the idea that reinforcing an idea several times is enough to instill that belief into someone else as well. Through repeatedly mentioning something, that something becomes believed. This concept can be incredibly useful in a wide range of situations, but perhaps the most profound is the idea that a completely false piece of information can be installed. The key here is to choose out a method that will best benefit the manipulator. For example, imagine that you are in a relatively new relationship with a woman. You have gone through the love bombing stages and are now interested in pushing the possibilities a bit further. You decide to convince the victim of something now. In thinking, you realize that perhaps the best concept that would serve you well is that the other person should feel lucky to have you. With that in mind, you repeatedly begin dropping hints around the victim. You mention how lucky the victim is to have such a loving, caring partner like yourself. Even if you are doing something entirely mundane and expected that does not deserve praise, such as taking out the garbage unprompted, you mention how lucky your victim is to have someone like you that cares enough to help without being told to do so. A little later in the day, you may decide to bring your victim a glass of water while she checks emails on her computer. She thanks you and again, you take the chance to add in a quick reference to how lucky she is to have you. After several instances of you naturally dropping such hints, you will be rewarded with the moment of truth—you will do something entirely unordinary and expected, and she will thank you profusely and reiterate just how happy she feels to have you as a partner. This is how you know you did it right. Now, praise that thought process. Shower her with love and affection after she has said it, and she is going to have that concept reinforced in her mind. Unconsciously, she will develop a connection between that thought and good feelings, and she will continue to entertain it. With the thought installed, you are able to use it whenever necessary. You can threaten to withhold affection or break up if she does not do what you ask. If she argues back about something, you can remind her just how lucky she is and that if she isn’t careful, she will lose a really good thing. As you will soon discover, you are appealing to one of the principles of persuasion here—reiterating how much she stands to lose if she does not get in line, and she is likely to give in out of fear of losing what she now believes is the greatest thing that has ever happened to her thanks to your very own manipulation tactics. You inflate the value of the relationship and then utilize the fear of losing that relationship to pull strings and keep the victim in line and obedient. Chapter 12: Basic Fundamentals anipulative people are not really interested in the well being and needs of other people unless their apparent concern allows them to gain control over these people. Knowing the main characteristics of these people will allow you to be alert and able to anticipate the next situation that someone tries to manipulate. For your own good, and in order to know how to deal with manipulative people, analyze these characteristics: 1) Manipulators do not question themselves and think that the problem is always in others. 2) They believe that the way they deal with situations is the only possible way to meet their needs, and that is their main concern. 3) For manipulative people, all situations and all relationships revolve around them and what others think, feel, and want is not valued. 4) They do not accept or understand the limits. They are ruthless in their pursuit of what they want and have little or no regard for the harm that this demand may cause to others. 5) A manipulative person tends to avoid responsibility and to blame other people or external factors. 6) Manipulative people feed on the sensitivity and conscientiousness of others. They know they are more likely to deceive others the more kindly, caring, and helpful they are. They may even praise others for their kindness when they only want this kindness to work in their favor. 7) They are masters of the art of creating intrigue, rivalry, and jealousy among the people around them. They encourage and promote disharmony. All of us have come across manipulative people, whether in the professional field or in a loving relationship. We do not always know how to deal with manipulative people, but these tips can help: 1) Learn to evaluate others for what they do and not so much for what they Say. 2) Reflect often on what you believe in, your ideals, values, and attitudes. When we are not aware of or convinced of what we believe in, it is easier for someone else to manipulate us. 3) Know your rights and recognize when someone tries to violate them. Defend yourself and your rights. 4) A great way to detect a manipulative person is to observe how that person acts in different contexts and with different people. Manipulative people tend to adopt extreme types of behavior and always aim to serve their personal interests. 5) The tactic of the manipulative person is to provoke and exploit the weaknesses of others so that they feel guilty and inadequate. We must question ourselves about the relationships we maintain, whether we are being respected, whether we feel good about the relationship, and whether the expectations and requests of the other person are reasonable. 6) It is important to be able to say "no" diplomatically, but firmly. It allows you to maintain your position, while at the same time not being rude or ill mannered. 7) In all your relationships, create clear and consistent boundaries and ensure that they are respected. Limits and mutual respect facilitate interpersonal relationships. 8) Do not give up your right to an opinion, express what you want and what you need, and always ensure you are treated with respect. 9) Trust your judgment. No one knows what is better for your life than yourself. 10) Remember that no one can manipulate you without your permission. Do not rely over and over again on that person who is constantly failing you and doing you harm. Surround yourself with people who are whole and positive. Manipulators have the ability to cultivate guilt in us, blackmail us and lie shamelessly. We end up doing what they want and following them, even if we have to go beyond our own limits as if our will did not even exist. This game can last for years, poisoning the lives of those who are manipulated. But, do remember your inalienable rights: You have the right to express your views, even if they are different from the other person’s. You have the right to protect yourself from physical, moral, and emotional threats. And you have the right to build your life according to your own notion of happiness. These are the limits of your personal space. Of course, the manipulators are great destroyers of our limits, who do not respect or recognize our rights. But only we ourselves are responsible for our own lives. Keep Your Distance During communication, a manipulator will change their mask all the time: with one person they may be extremely polite, while with another, they may react with violence and rudeness. In one situation the manipulator will impersonate a defenseless person, while in another they will show their aggressive side. If you have already noticed that someone's personality tends to reflect these extremes, the best option is to keep a safe distance from that person and not interact with them unless you really need them. Most commonly, the motives that lead to this behavior are complex and rooted in childhood. Correcting, educating, or saving a manipulator is not your problem. Do Not Take It Seriously The task of a manipulator is to play with a target's weaknesses. It is not surprising that in the presence of such a person, you begin to feel your "inability" and even try to blame yourself for not obeying that person's orders. Identify these emotions and remember that the problem is not in you. They are manipulating you to make you feel that you are not good enough so that you will be willing to submit to the wishes of another, even giving up your own rights. Analyze your relationship with the manipulator by mentally answering the following questions: Does this person show you true respect? Are their requirements and requests well founded? Is it a balanced relationship? Are you the only one who strives to achieve their goals while the other only receives the benefits? Does this relationship prevent you from maintaining a good relationship with yourself? The answers to these questions will help you understand who the problem is, whether it is in you or the other person. Manipulators will always try to coerce you with their requests, making you forget yourself and your needs. If the manipulator tries to offend you or refute your arguments, shift the focus of attention from yourself to your interlocutor. Ask a few test questions, and it will be clearer to you if such a person has at least a bit of self criticism and/or shame. "Do you think it's fair that you're asking me that?" "You think this is fair to me?" "Can I have my own opinion on this?" "Are you asking or affirming?" "What do I get in return?" "Do you really think I ... (restate the manipulator's request) ...?" Asking these questions is like putting the manipulator in front of a mirror, where the person will see the "reflection", the true nature of their request. Still, there is a unique type of character who will not even bother to listen to you and will constantly insist on their own ideas. In that case, take the following advice: Do not rush! Another of the manipulator's preferred strategies is to force you to respond or act immediately. In a situation where the time goes by fast, it is easier for him to manipulate someone to get what he wants (in sales language, it would be like saying "close the deal"). If you feel you are being pressured, do not rush to make a decision. Use the time factor in your favor, remove the chance of having your will coerced. You will keep track of the situation by saying "I'll think about it". These are very effective words! Take a break to look at the pros and cons. Determine whether you want to continue arguing about it or give it a definite "no". Learn to Say 'No' Knowing how to say 'no' is the most important part of the art of communication. A clear denial allows you to remain immobile in your opinion, creating a good relationship with your interlocutor (if his intentions are healthy). Remember that you have the right to set your priorities, you have the right to say 'no' without feeling guilty. You have the right to choose your own path to happiness. Tell Him About the Consequences As aresponse to gross intrusions into your personal space and the difficulty in accepting your 'no', speak to the manipulator about the consequences of their actions. The ability to convincingly identify and expose possible outcomes is one of the most efficient methods of truncating the game's manipulation. You'll put him in a dead end, forcing him to change his attitude toward you or even reveal his plan, making it infeasible. Defend Yourself from Mockery and Offenses Sometimes manipulators even offend or mock directly, trying to scare their victims or cause them some kind of suffering. The most important thing to remember is that people like this cling to what they believe to be a weakness. As long as you are passive and obedient, it will be an easy target before their eyes. The curious thing about this is that, in most cases, this type of person is, in reality, cowardly. As soon as the victim begins to demonstrate personality and defend their rights, the manipulator withdraws. This rule works in any sphere of society, whether at school, in the family, or even at work. Remember that it is not worth getting into a fight, just keep your cool and make your point clear. According to studies, many abusers have been or are abused. It is obvious that this condition in no way justifies their behavior, but it is important to remember to respond to their actions with cold blood and without any remorse. While most people may say that they would not be attracted to a narcissistic or psychopathic partner, several studies have already confirmed that obscure personalities attract us sexually. The truth is that many people are mysteriously attracted to these profiles. Recent research has found that individuals with "shadowy" personality traits are more physically attractive than normal people. But what is so attractive about these citizens? According to experts, the personality traits of narcissists make these people consistently successful. According to Nicholas Holtzman and Michael Strube of the University of Washington, there is a direct relationship between physical attraction and people's tendencies toward narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. For researchers, these characteristics have an influence on people's physical appearance and behavior. In an interview with 111 college students, a group of volunteers, both men and women, were photographed without makeup and with makeup along with a more polished look. Then the photos were shown to strangers. By comparing the student's attractiveness indexes, the researchers were able to determine how much each student was able to become more attractive with the use of makeup, accessories, and more flashy clothing. Then Holtzman and Strube evaluated students according to their personalities and tendencies for narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. This combination of assessments was used to calculate a final personality score for each volunteer. The result of the study showed that people with obscure personality traits are always seen as more physically attractive than others. This proves that narcissists are more popular and considered more sympathetic. In addition, they are more effective at presenting themselves in a way that makes a good impression. The researchers also concluded that when we perceive someone as physically attractive, we automatically assume that they are also kinder, smarter, and more confident. Combining physical attractiveness with confidence and humor, narcissists have a great trump card in their favor. Narcissists' Popularity Despite being quite successful with the opposite sex, the popularity of narcissists tends to decline over time. The process may take several weeks, perhaps because people with obscure personality traits are really skilled at keeping their nasty side hidden from others. Conclusion f you have once found yourself among the group of people who often wonder why humans act the way they do, it is a great pleasure to have had this rollercoaster ride with you around everything you need to know about dark psychology and mind control, how it works and why people use it. At the beginning of life, psychologists say humans are born in a state known as “tabula rasa,” which in English translates to a “blank slate.” Therefore, it is the interaction of nature and nurture of people that forms the personality of every human. Some may be smarter than others, while some will not be as smart. Interestingly, the smart ones are the ones that can easily make use of mind control techniques to make their way through any situation. On the surface, these people may seem to just be going about life like every other human, but beyond the surface there are a lot of things going on within their psyche. They are always on the lookout for gestures, perceptions and even intuitions. These are the factors that will determine the way they relate to the things and the people around them. With the use of mind control techniques, people can manipulate other people and situations so that they will be able to get the things they want whenever they want them. With the techniques discussed, you have discovered ways to make sure that everything works in your favor. You can either brainwash, manipulate, seduce or even hypnotize your target(s) to get your desired result. Those that are not as smart will always fall prey to this kind of mind control techniques. They will always be at the receiving end of situations involving dark psychology. Mind controllers, instead of seeing people as partners with whom they can work with to achieve great results, would rather see others as tools to be used. This will result in adverse psychological effects that could get as serious as losing one's mind and sense of self. What's more, gaining control of the mind of another person can lead them to depression and suicide if it is not well managed. In closing, this has given you all you need to know about mind control. It is hoped by at this point you have learned how to spot, avoid and use these tools. Remember, mind control is not only about negativity, it can also be put to some positive use. Whatever you choose to use it for, this has surely brought you all you need to make use of it. Good luck! PART IT — Stoicism Introduction when you work hard but don’t seem to get rewarded. Moreover, life seems to favor those who do not deserve the credit and disfavors those who are equally deserving of an opportunity. What comes out of such situations is pain and desperation. However, Zeno of Citium founded the school of thought known as “stoicism” which was designed to deal with the misfortunes of life. This philosophy states that the human path is engrossed with pain and that one has to accept the situations as they present themselves. In such cases, one should embrace endurance and not be controlled by the pleasures and sufferings of this world. Over the years, stoicism scholars have identified eudaimonia (which can be interpreted as happiness or welfare) as the core tenet in a person’s life. ! lhere are times when life seems to be unfair. This is especially true To gain such happiness, you are obliged to behave virtuously. This means that you ought to act according to the appropriate morals of your society. Therefore, the stoics propose that a virtuous attitude is internal, and that external things such as riches and material desires should not be of significant concern. Other scholars like Epictetus, Seneca and Marcus Aurelius acknowledged that nature practically controls every social situation. Therefore, judgment is meant to be vindicated upon the behavior of a person rather than their words. They concluded that nature controls everything that happens in this world. Therefore, the stoic ideology is paramount to the understanding of the various principles that govern it. Such principles include nature, reason, virtue, wisdom, and duty. All of these principles are to be held in high esteem and not dismissed in everyday life. Stoicism is simply a wisdom philosophy. In other words, it is a philosophy that teaches you how to live life well. Every human being desires to live a life of happiness, and Stoicism seeks to increase your happiness. Stoicism is a philosophy that you can live by. In fact, Stoicism is the only philosophy that from its inception addressed all humans. The Stoic philosophy saw all genders, races, and social classes as being equal to one another. This also explains why Stoicism has managed to survive for more than 2300 years. It is acceptable by people of all colors, classes, and cultures. It has evolved together with humanity. Stoicism holds the most practical and relevant rules for all sorts of artists, writers, and entrepreneurs. Their attention is always on two specific things: e How to live a happy, fulfilling, and wonderful life? e How to turn yourself into a better person? The main goal is finding inner peace by realizing we only have a short time to live, being aware of impulses, having self control, overcome adversity. These are meditative practices that will help us live with nature and not against it. We have to understand obstacles we face and never run away. We must turn them into fuel for our fires. According to Stoic philosophy, there is nothing that can be considered good or bad. Everything is down to our perception and judgment. The only good thing that exists is Virtue, and this is the highest ideal everyone should pursue. Stoics believe that evil does not exist in nature, but it is human behavior that causes harm. People who cause harm lack virtue and have refused to live according to nature. For Stoics, the highest ideal is to achieve a noble character. This has nothing to do with wealth or status. It is only achievable if you live according to nature and pursue virtue in everything that you do. The unique charm and value of stoicism that make it so important and easy to practice even nowadays is its accessibility and its applicability. One of the main goals of stoicism was liberation from suffering and endurance when faced with life’s highs and lows. The aim of this is to provide you with practical knowledge about this notion which is not only an abstraction praised by philosophers in old times. This is your short guide to stoicism and to various means of practicing it in your life. In the following pages, you will discover why even in modern, technology dominated, and consume oriented times like ours, stoicism remains an important value. Stoicism can be both a tool and a weapon. If you understand it in depth and know how to practice it, stoicism can be your key to strength and to happiness. Learning how to consciously value stoicism can make you tremendously independent and unshakeable in many situations you encounter in life. If you want to rediscover an old lesson in personal empowerment in a new light, read on and allow yourself to benefit from the potential of this unique virtue. Everybody today is searching for a way to be truly happy. This explains why we all find ourselves chasing after more money, more friends, and more stuff. Yet at the end of our lives, we realize that it was all for nothing. So, is the Stoic philosophy the best answer? If you wish to learn more about stoicism, this is perfect for you. The main goal of this is to answer a lot of questions like what stoicism is, what is its history, what is its virtue and more. It teaches how to become a better person by finding your inner peace and mindfulness. You needed a change, you wanted to get out of this circle, you wanted to succeed and now finally you found this. Nobody is in charge of your life. It is only your responsibility to do all the steps towards better future. That is why you have to ask yourself honestly if you want to achieve something big and to inspire other people. Chapter 1 What is Stoicism? toicism is an interesting idea from ancient times that has really translated over to modern times. It came out during a time of great turmoil in ancient times, a time when emotions could get out of hand and life was not a predictable thing like before. The tenets that come with Stoicism often work well with times that are tough, times of misunderstanding and conflict, which is why it can sometimes work so well in our modern times. The ideas behind Stoicism help you to find true happiness. This philosophy is meant to put you in control of your emotions, allowing you to look at the situation logically, rather than letting your emotions get out of control and determine how you react, sometimes making you to react in ways that you are ashamed of later on. In addition, you will be able to understand how others react in some cases, keeping your relationships strong while also working with helping out others. The History of Stoicism Before we are able to look at how to get started with Stoicism, we need to have a bit of background about Stoicism. Stoicism is a philosophy that was founded by Zeno of Citium around the 3rd century BC. The philosophy asserts that the follower needs to have virtues, like wisdom, in order to find happiness and that any judgment needs to be based on the behavior of the other person, rather than on their words. Stoicism often talks about how we are not the ones in control of, and that we can’t rely on, the external events that go on around us. But we can control how we respond to these events. Stoicism is a pretty simple philosophy, but in many cases, it can be hard to stick with. It works to remind us that the world is unpredictable and that our moment in life is pretty brief. It works to teach us how to be strong and steadfast and that to find true happiness with our short time on this earth, we need to be able to control ourselves. It also recognizes that many people are unhappy in life, but the source of this dissatisfaction is not in having too little money or not having enough stuff, it is with our dependency on our emotions and acting out right away, rather than using logic. One of the nice things that you can find with Stoicism is that it doesn’t spend time with complicated theories that try to explain the world. Rather, it spends its time trying to help us to fight and overcome some of our own destructive emotions and how to act when actions can be taken. The principles of Stoicism are all about action, not debating all of the time. There are three principal people who are considered leaders of the ideas of Stoicism. Marcus Aurelius was one of the most powerful people in the world at that time as the Emperor of the Roman Empire at that time, and yet he sat down every day to write out some notes on the topics of compassion, humility, and restraint. Then there was Epictetus, who spent much time as a slave and then endured in order to begin his own school in which he was about to teach some of the greatest minds in Rome. And then there was Seneca, who was turned on by Nero and asked to commit suicide, was then able to think only of comforting his friends and his wife. But while those three are considered the leaders of Stoicism, there are many others who have practiced it throughout the ages, including entrepreneurs, writers, artists, kings, and presidents. Both modern, as well as historical, men, are able to show Stoicism as their way of life. For example, the founding fathers spent time being inspired by the ideas of Stoicism. It is said that George Washington learned about Stoicism at the age of 17 by his neighbors and then later he put on plays, including one about Cato, to help inspire his men at Valley Forge. Thomas Jefferson kept Seneca right beside him on his death bed. Adam Smith, an economist, write out theories of interconnectedness, or capitalism, and much of his ideas where influenced by the ideas of Stoicism. These are just a few examples of how Stoicism has expanded to mean much more than just an ancient philosophy. It is one that has helped countless people to overcome their dissatisfaction in the world and to find happiness. While it may have occurred in ancient times, people of today will be able to find it useful as well. Stoicism will differ compared to many of the existing philosophies in one main sense, it is more about action and putting the ideas to work, rather than just talking about them all of the time. If you learn how to control your emotions, learn how to control the things that you can and give up on those that you can’t, and learn how to think about things logically, you are able to live the Stoic way of life and you will see a huge increase in your happiness. Some of the basic ideas of the stoics e The Stoic ideas are great to use in order to increase the happiness you have in your life, regardless of what is going on in the outside world. Some of the basic ideas that are found with the stoics include: e The key to living successfully and feeling happy, is to find freedom from the violent emotions. You are still able to enjoy emotions like joy and happiness, but you will be able to think about things logically and pick the emotions that are right for the situation. e The key to get freedom from these violent feelings is to be virtuous, regardless of what others may think about you. e The key to living a life that is virtuous is to live in a manner that is consistent with nature. e The things that most people call good, such as a good reputation, possessions, health, and life can often be in accordance of our nature, but we shouldn’t always be running around for more things. e These things are not always in accord with our nature because sometimes they can be purchased or preserved at the expense of your virtue and your integrity. e Successful living and virtue may not be inborn in all people, but with a deliberate choice and continuous attention you are able to figure out what is inside of your power and what is not. The idea of Stoicism is one that is all about your happiness and enjoying life. You learn that it is not all about the materialistic things, it is about living a good life, one where you are slow to anger because you understand why others react the way that they do and where you are willing to help out other people. It is one where you are able to look at your emotions and determine if they are really the ones that will help you to be happy in that situation. Many people think that the Stoics are indifferent to everything in life, that they don’t care about what is going on around them, but this is not true; they simply understand that not everything needs to be reacted to in anger or in retaliation all of the time. Many people believe that Stoicism is an ancient thought system, one that they shouldn’t follow or worry about at all because it is so old and can’t relate to them. But in our modern times when emotions and materialism is all over the place, it is good to have a philosophy like Stoicism around to help us enjoy our lives and to focus on things that really matter. Before we get into how your life should be when you want to follow stoicism it is important to understand what this school of thought is all about. When you get a chance to explore this, it is much easier to see how stoicism is able to work for your needs and you can maybe figure some of the different ways that you can make changes all on your own. Stoicism was one of the brand new philosophical movements that happened during the Hellenistic period. This school of philosophy was founded in Athens during the early 3rd century BC, but it has been practiced through many different time periods because the ideas that come with it have practical uses even today. The philosophy of stoicism is all about asserting that virtue, like wisdom, is happiness and that a judgment needs to be based on the behavior, rather than the words. It also talks about how we are not able to rely on or control some of the external events that are going on around us, but we can control how we react and our responses to what happens. That is just some of the basic of stoicism. There are also a few central teachings that come with it as well. The ideas are meant to remind us that the world is going to be unpredictable and getting all upset about it is just going to make us unhappy when we realize that we don’t have any control over it. It helps us to realize that we can’t be in control, but we can learn how to find happiness inside of ourselves and be steadfast and strong, regardless of what chaos is going on around us. Stoics are often looking to quell that dissatisfaction that is common in most of us. But while other people are going to blame external events for this unhappiness and dissatisfaction, the Stoics understand that this comes from their impulsive dependency rather than on logic. If you want to be happy, you need to learn how to rely on yourself, and not on outside events that can constantly change and you have no control over. Stoicism may sound confusing, but it is actually not going to concern itself with some of the other complicated theories that are out there in the world. It is more about learning how to overcome some of our emotions that are considered destructive and to learn to act when we can actually do some actions. It is not meant for a lot of endless debates. It helps us to realize what we can do to make changes in our lives, and how to just be strong and not worry when things are beyond our control. Originally, Stoicism had three leaders: Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and Seneca. Despite having these three that helped to start it, there are many people throughout history who have practiced Stoicism including entrepreneurs, writers, artists, presidents, and kings. For example, it was said that King Frederick the Great would ride around with some of the works of stoicism because they could “sustain you in misfortune.” Now, stoicism is still found in our modern times. Take a look at the word “stoic” in the English language. This is a word that has a meaning that is similar to what the original stoics practiced when the religion started in that this word will refer to someone who seems to be indifferent to grief, joy, pleasure, or pain. Of course, the stoics do feel emotions and you don’t have to completely give up on all of the feelings in your life in order to be a stoic. The difference in that you need to learn how to control your emotions and find happiness from within. There are going to be events in your life that are hard, ones that don’t go your way, but if you spend your time getting all worked up about the emotions that you are feeling, you are ruining your happiness, and it is mostly over things that you aren’t able to control. You can enjoy the joyous occasions in your life and be happy, but you learn how to control your emotions. While the ideas of stoicism may have started many years ago in ancient Greece, there are still many people who use this school of thought in their daily lives even in modern times. This is a great school of thought that you are able to follow if you are ready to learn how to let go of the things that are out of your control and to find your own inner happiness. In this, we will take some time to explore some of the different aspects that come with Stoicism and how you can make this work in your own life as well. Chapter 2 The Promise of Stoic Philosophy onsider seeing a lush green tree growing in the middle of a scorching hot desert. A tree that is flourishing and thriving despite the extremities of the weather. It would present such a pleasant sight for any onlookers. Rather than creating a selfish, destructive environment, the tree would provide shade to those who find the heat unbearable. The tree in this example is being virtuous, accepting the factors that are not within its control, and not letting hardships deter its growth. Doesn’t that sound familiar? The tree in the aforementioned example is the embodiment of Stoic philosophy. However, what is considered normal living for the tree, would be considered no less than a miracle to others. Anyone who sees the tree would be interested in knowing how it has managed not to wither and die. How it has persevered against drought, strong desert winds, and unrelenting heat. When an idea inspires you, it also makes you curious about the hypothesis that led to it. Somehow, the path to achieving that level of wisdom becomes more important than merely admiring it from afar. You wonder if you can personalize the idea and use it to improve your own situation. We familiarized the readers with the idea of Stoicism and the lives of the most prominent Stoic philosophers. Now, the text will focus on more practical aspects, such as how to live by Stoic principles and why it will benefit you. The first step is to incorporate a few core values in your lifestyles which resonate with Stoic beliefs. Essential beliefs and principles of Stoicism Luckily, Stoicism is not a rigid doctrine. It addresses your doubts and apprehensions without labeling you as an infidel. It is also flexible and convenient to adopt. For example, if the philosophy suggests that you practice remaining calm, it does so without outlining a stringent exercise. Hence, it is very possible to merge Stoic virtues with your own faith. In fact, it is actually an extension of your faith. You could remain calm by meditating, praying, reading the Holy Scriptures, or choosing to exercise. And, you can start right away without requiring formal training or ‘acceptance’ of any type of faith. Although there is no exhaustive list of Stoic values, it would be nice to have some guidance for beginners. Some starter principles are discussed in detail below. Remember, as long as you preserve the essence of the teachings, you can always modify the beliefs to suit your needs. Amor Fati — Love Your Life Negative emotions such as anger, hate, and sorrow, can be quite exhausting. They put a strain on our mental and physical health. Our frustrations are often related to a lack of acceptance of reality. Once we accept what we cannot change, we tend to become calmer and more peaceful. The term Amor Fati was first popularized by Friedrich Nietzsche, who saw greatness in anybody who could not only accept his/her fate, but actually love it. It can be simplified into the idea that you ought not complain about your life, and that you should learn to embrace its imperfections. It is the appreciation of the little things that life has to offer. For example, if you’re fond of rainy weather, it does not mean that you cease to cherish the sun. Once you become used to reviewing every situation impersonally, based on logic, you realize how easy this is. It would mean that you realize the importance of the sun and begin to value its existence. Although Amor Fati was a title given to this phenomenon by Nietzsche, the Stoics could relate the concept to the teachings of their forefathers. We have learned that Epictetus did not see the loss of his leg as an impediment. He accepted his reality wholeheartedly, which enabled him to live a more fulfilling life. Through his practical example, the Stoic philosopher put forward the concept of Amor Fati, which is Latin for ‘love of fate’. Similar examples were set by other Stoics of the past. However, we should admit that we have heard such phrases so often that they may have started to lose their meaning and significance. What’s different about Stoic philosophy, however, is that it does not simply dictate that you ‘love your life’. Stoics trust nature to have the best plan laid out, while also encouraging you to enhance your cognitive skills so that you can rationalize everything. They believe that by becoming more mindful of your surroundings, you will automatically begin to adore the marvels that you otherwise fail to acknowledge. Thus, loving your life would lead to the ultimate Stoic goal of achieving eudaimonia. Practice Misfortune — Always Be Prepared The biggest reason for our sleepless nights and anxious behaviors in the present is fear. The fear of something going wrong, the fear of some outcome other than what we desire. This fear affects our decision making ability, our performance, and our overall health. For a moment, let’s imagine how liberating it would be to live in complete freedom from this fear. The fear of a misfortune clips our wings and prevents us from daring to try our hand at innovations. It cripples our ability to make effort, or to take a leap of faith toward our goals. Practicing misfortune in Stoicism refers to developing a fearless attitude by imagining the worst possible outcome and preparing yourself to face it. Regardless of the likelihood of it actually happening, you would find yourself more at ease with taking risks. As long as you are not reckless, greater risks could mean greater rewards. When we’re starting a new job, moving into a new town, or meeting someone for the first time, our brain is accustomed to asking “what if?” What if I fail at the job? What if the place isn’t safe? What if that person I know turns out to be a disappointment? Being a Stoic, you would maintain a calm mind and try to prepare yourself for such outcomes. If you lose the job, it was fate’s plan for you all along, and yov’ll soon find the one you’re destined for. If somebody does damage to you or your possessions, you will survive it if you are meant to, maintaining your contentment regardless. If things go sour with an acquaintance, you’ll be able to detach yourself. Suddenly, by addressing your apprehensions, you have also eliminated the aspect of fear. The daunting nature of uncertainty can be more unnerving than actual misadventures, so it is wise to hope for the best while also preparing yourself for the worst. Memento Mori — It’s All Ephemeral It is a universal fact that short lived things are valued more. If we’re aware that what we have can be taken away from us at any moment, we tend to make the best use of it while it lasts. We do not take such things for granted. What we often forget is that life too is one of those finite things. We continue to make long term plans, elaborating the ways we want events to unfold. We often get carried away by our aspirations and forget to live in the moment. Stoicism teaches you to adopt a proactive approach to life. When you constantly remind yourself that death is always looming over you, you unveil a previously undiscovered treasure of efficiency. You become more productive, accumulate more good deeds, and make better use of your resources. In short, you make hay while the sun shines. Another interpretation of Memento Mori (which is a Latin phrase, meaning ‘remember you will die’) is that when life puts you in a favorable situation, be careful not to dwell on it. If you’re blessed with immense riches, you should still maintain simple living standards, staying alert to the temporary nature of the world. This also ensures humility. Alternatively, in adversity, you must remember that it is not a permanent state, so you should not let it dampen your spirits. Living in the moment would enable you to avoid excessive emotions related to the past or present. It would thus save you from getting overly attached to life and worldly belongings. Greater Command over Perception — Take Control of Your Feelings There is no built in feature in the human body that would allow us to switch off our feelings. No matter how badly we want to do that, we simply can’t. At least, not without becoming totally apathetic to our surroundings, which would not be a healthy goal. The goal is to be able to exercise greater control over our feelings. The Stoics suggest that one should train his/her brain to perceive circumstances in a positive way. The question is, how? Remember when Zeno perceived the shipwreck as a blessing in disguise, rather than a tragedy? He did this by choosing to focus on the good that came from it. He was thankful for the events that were responsible for his foray into philosophy. Today, we all know how right he was and how fate had better plans for him. So, the answer is pretty simple — the events in our lives are neutral. It is actually our reaction that makes them good or bad. We cannot choose what will happen, but we can certainly choose how to react. Some of us do acknowledge that what happens is for the best, but it is mostly in hindsight. Stoicism requires that we maintain this mentality at all times. Remember... this is different from being apathetic. It does not mean that you should laugh at terrible pains and misfortunes, or try to numb them out. It simply means you should rationally try to analyze each situation. If you were to get into an accident because you were speeding, you wouldn’t be able to rationally say that it happened because your life is awful. Your best course of action would be to take care of the problem in that current moment, rather than yelling, cursing, or trying to find something else to blame. It would not give you a valid reason to be harsh or cold or moody to everyone that you encounter that day. Basically, what had to happen, happened. Stoic philosophy uses logic and reasoning to scrutinize a situation. By letting emotions overpower us, we waste our energy on things that are unimportant and reduce productivity. When you’re in command of your perception, this unnecessary sweat can be avoided. Premeditatio Malorum Earlier, we discussed the concept of practicing misfortune, which is a kind of mental preparation for things that could go wrong. Premeditatio Malorum is an extension of the same principle. The phrase translates into ‘the premeditation of evils’. While practicing misfortune is all about addressing your fears, meditating on negative outcomes would mean deliberately convincing yourself that things COULD go wrong. Instead of thinking ‘if this goes wrong, PI do so and so’, you imagine that it will go wrong and that is absolutely okay. Premeditatio Malorum is not entirely separate from the practice of misfortunes, but almost the next step in the sequence. It requires great time and understanding, which might make it unsuitable for beginners. To better understand the principle, it is important to study the lives of ancient Stoic philosophers in detail. Virtuous Living Nothing holds more importance in Stoicism than living by the best moral standards. Stoics believe that your decisions in life should be measured with only one yardstick — morality. Instead of profit and loss, the two sides of the weighing scale should be how moral or amoral a business might be. The Stoic philosophers laid great emphasis on keeping the conscience clear. They believed that our actions should be led by our moral compass. From Seneca to Marcus Aurelius, the early Stoics believed in maintaining good intentions and leaving the rest to destiny. By allowing desires to be the driving force in life, we open the door for corruption. Whether it is the wish for greater riches or a lust for power, desires can be terribly intoxicating. They can make us forget our values and fix our attention on achieving ends that don’t justify their means. Stoicism draws a distinct line between needs and wants. Once you know the difference between what is a necessity and what is merely a material want, you become content with whatever you can acquire by rightful means. Through moral enlightenment, you disempower your desires. As a society, we could benefit a great deal from the adoption of Stoic virtues. Many corrupt practices could be eliminated and conflicts could be resolved with ease. Plato’s View It is quite unfortunate that we fail to analyze our actions from others’ points of view. True neutrality is about subjecting our own conduct to the same scrutiny that we subject others to. Our judgments often view others through a different lens than the one we have custom made for ourselves. We find it extremely difficult to analyze situations without any emotional bias. If the same sin is committed by two people and we happen to be fonder of one than the other, the gravity of each equal wrongdoing seems to differ significantly in our minds. This is not just unfair to others; it also betrays our own intelligence. Plato’s view or ‘the view from above’ applies uniform evaluation standards to everyone’s actions, including our own. It allows us to examine scenarios from afar, leading to greater neutrality. Therefore, we become more mindful and pay greater attention to our moral conduct, two of the core Stoic principles. However, there is one thing that we must keep in mind — we should ensure that our thinking is not influenced by the views of others. Our accountability should be based on our own values, rather than a third person’s opinions. Marcus Aurelius warned against paying more attention to what other people think and ignoring our own instincts. This would most likely only lead to feelings of resentment. The Good, Bad and the Indifferent Stoicism classifies life events into three broad categories. They are: good, bad and indifferent. The ‘good’ includes virtues, as well as things that lead to eudaimonia. The ‘bad’ are all the malpractices, or, the opposite of virtue. Indifferent things refer to fate, destiny, and everything that is part of nature, and hence, beyond our control. Let us try to understand all three separately. The good feelings are also known as eupatheia. They include all the things that the Stoics deem important, such as living by virtue, Amor Fati, and staying mindful. Embracing the good, according to Stoic philosophy, leads to apatheia i.e. equanimity. The bad things are those that incite feelings of fear or desire, negating the core principles of Stoicism. One should identify these and practice restraint, which would lead him/her to a better self understanding and awareness. Indifferent things include anything that is neither good nor bad. These are to be accepted, as they are and not given unnecessary time and attention. One should not care about unimportant things and try to remain focused on practicing ‘good’ and avoiding the ‘bad’. Journal Since childhood, many of us have been taught to record our thoughts in a diary or journal. The habit seems difficult to develop and maintain, but once you include it in your routine, your life will begin to seem incomplete without it. When you jot down your thoughts, you are not just writing; you are actually doing a whole lot more. Recording your thoughts is equivalent to saying them out aloud. It acts as a tool for accountability. If a thought is not worthy of being shared publicly, it is not a thought worth acknowledging. One tends to be more cautious and mindful once his/her thoughts are translated into words. This is in line with the Stoic teachings to ‘guard your thoughts’. It strengthens one’s character as he/she starts acknowledging only those thoughts which are worthwhile. If only more people practiced this, the world would be a much more peaceful place, considering that many of the most sinister crimes originate from the most impulsive, simplistic thinking. Another reason to consider journaling, from the Stoic perspective, is that it enhances creativity. It leaves less time for negative feelings and filters your ideas until only the most refined versions remain. Contemplative skills are improved without much effort. All great Stoic philosophers were also dedicated intellectuals. They all documented their musings in one way or the other. That is why the philosophy flourished as much as it did. Thus, an act as simple as maintaining a daily journal can improve the quality — not just of your own life, but of society’s as a whole. Chapter 3 The Most Important Stoic Philosophers fter the passing of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE, the Greek empire’s disintegration brought in the beginning of the Hellenistic period, during which several philosophies, including Stoicism, flourished. The most notable ancient Stoics lived beginning from 301 BC to 180 C.E. Below are the most notable ancient Stoic philosophers you need to know. Zeno of Citium (334 to 262 BCE) Originating from Citium (modern day Cyprus), Zeno established and taught at the Stoic school of philosophy from around 300 BC in Athens. Most of what we know about his life comes from the memoir "Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers," composed by Diogenes Laértius. According to Diogenes, Zeno was a haggard, dark skinned person who lived an ascetic life despite his wealth. Just like his father, Zeno also became a wealthy merchant who made his fortune from trading a purple or violet dye extracted from the murex sea snail. On a sea trade voyage, Zeno of Citium (modern Cyprus) was supposed to transport his cargo of purple dye from the island of Phoenicia to Peiraeus when he was caught in a terrible storm. Tragedy hit when his ship sank. Zeno managed to survive and was luckily washed ashore near the seaport of Athens. Upon realizing the damage, he was distraught; he has lost everything he owned. He has nothing but the ragged clothes on his back. While walking the streets of the foreign city of Athens, he visited a bookseller, encountered Xenophon’s Memorabilia, and met the most famous Cynic philosopher at that time, Crates of Thebes. Zeno eventually became the pupil of Crates of Thebes and then studied under other philosophers such as Stilpo the Megarian and Polemo. After studying for many years, he established his own school at around 301 BC and began to teach on the Stoa Poikile or ‘Painted Porch’ (Ancient Greek: ġ nown otod), a colonnade decorated with historical and mythical battle scenes, on the north side of the market place in Athens. When Zeno started teaching, he could not afford a building such as Plato’s Academy or Aristotle’s Lyceum, so he and his followers probably gathered under the shade of a store in the marketplace. Because it was an open area, anyone interested could listen and join in the debate. Today we know the philosophy as Stoicism, a name deriving from the Stoa Poikile. But it was initially known as “Zenonism,” after the founder Zeno of Citium. However, this name was soon dropped because the Stoics did not consider the founders to be perfectly wise, and to avoid the risk of the philosophy becoming an apotheosis or cult of personality. Due to Zeno’s years of study under the Cynic philosopher Crates of Thebes, much of Stoicism is based on the moral ideas of Cynism. Stoic philosophy emphasizes on the genuine feelings of serenity and goodness that originates from carrying on with an actual existence of prudence in understanding with nature. The philosophy was so successful that it became the leading philosophical thought from the Greek to the Roman period. Cleanthes (330 BC 230 BC) As the successor to Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes of Assos was the second scholarch or leader of the Stoic school in Athens. As indicated by Diogenes, he was conceived in Assos in the Troad to a poor family and working on boxing during his adolescence. He came to Athens with just four drachmae in his pocket and bolstered himself by working during the evening as a water transporter to a nursery worker. During the day, he invested hours contemplating reasoning under Zeno. In view of his highly good characteristics, persistent perseverance, and enterprising nature, on the demise of Zeno in 262, he turned into the Stoic school's successor. Regardless of that, he kept on supporting himself by the work of his own hands. He died at 99 years old in 230 B.C. Chrysippus of Soli (279 BC — 206 BC) He was the child of Apollonius of Tarsus and was a local of Soli, Cilicia and became into the second scholarch of the Stoic school. Eventually, he became the second scholarch of the Stoic school. He was said to be short in stature and have trained as a long distance runner. He moved to Athens where he turned into an understudy of Cleanthes. He was known for his intellect, self confidence, self reliance, and prolific writing. Diogenes wrote that Chrysippus composed more than 705 works and rarely went without writing five hundred lines a day. Through his writings, he expanded on he developed the major regulations of the Stoic originator, Zeno of Citium. Shockingly, none of his formed works have endured the exemption of parts cited underway of later creators like Cicero, Seneca, Galen, Plutarch, and others. (95 BC — 46 BC) Marcus Porcius Cato Uticensis His folks passed on when he was young. He and his sister Porcia (Porcia the Elder) was cared for by their extremely wealthy maternal uncle, Marcus Livius Drusus, a distinguished Roman politician and reformer. Besides being a renowned orator, Cato is famous for his stubbornness, moral integrity, immunity to bribes, and his dictates for the abundant corruption of the period. Most importantly, history recalls Cato as Julius Caesar's most imposing, maddening foe. While he wrote neither a biography nor left behind any essays of journals, Cato the Younger surrounded himself with philosophers, not political advisors and made his own version of fundamental Stoic ideas. He even went so far as to create his individual Stoic exercises. He would train himself to endure self control and patience by walking around Rome in odd clothing, to get people to laugh at him. His hard work seems to have paid off. Porcia Catonis (70 BC — 43 BC) Known by many names (Porcia Cartonis; Porcia of Cato; Porcia the daughter of Cato), Porcia is the daughter of Cato the Younger and his first wife, Atilia. She is the most famous among the three ancient women of Stoicism. She was a coeval the Stoic philosopher Posidonius of Rhodes and Roman senator, Cicero. She is better known for being the second spouse of Brutus, one of the assassins of Julius Caesar's and for her alleged suicide. Gaius Musonius Rufus (20 30 CE — 101 CE) While he may not be as famous as the Greek philosopher Socrates, Gaius Musonius Rufus is considered to be the foremost stoic of his day and had been called by Roman historians as “The Roman Socrates.” The son of a Roman eques, he taught philosophy during the infamous rule of Roman Emperor Nero. He was exiled from Rome three times in all the first was in 60 CE, then in 65 CE, and again in 75 CE. It is in his second exile where he became a real practitioner of the Stoic art of living. Because of his practice and teachings of Stoicism, Mosonius Rufus became an object of suspicion and abhorrence at Nero’s court. He was banished to the arid and unpopulated island of Gyaros in 65 CE. A gathering of pieces from his addresses still perseveres. He is moreover associated with being the teacher of Epictetus. The Three Most Important Stoics Lucius Annaeus Seneca (4 BC — 65 BC) Referred to just as Seneca, he was a Stoic philosopher, writer, and Roman politician. During his initial youth, he got philosophical preparing from Attalus the Stoic. He was likewise considered under the scholars, Sotion, and Papirius Fabianus both of whom had a place with the brief School of Sextii, a Roman school of theory that mixed Pythagorean, Platonic, Cynic, and Stoic components together. Seneca was designated tutor to young Nero, the future emperor of Rome. From 54 to 62 CE, he became Nero’s advisor and was appointed suffect consul in 56 CE. Seneca the Younger wrote the most of the existing literature on Stoicism, including his famous philosophical letters to his friend Lucilius, the landmark treatise On Anger, and several other books. Epictetus (c. 55 CE — 135 CE) Epictetus was brought into the world a slave. He was born and spent most of his early childhood in Hierapolis, Phrygia. His master was Epaphroditus, an administrator for the Roman Emperor Nero. It also unknown when he came to Rome. While in Rome, it is believed that Epictetus studied under Musings Rufus, a Roman senator, and Stoic philosopher. He eventually became a free man (but it is also unknown how and when) and taught Stoic philosophy. He fled to Nicopolis in Epirus, Greece, where he built up his very own school. He absconded to the western city of Nicopolis in Epirus, Gree where he built up his very own school. His lessons were composed and distributed by his student Arrian of Nicomedia in the work Discourses, which included four books planned to catch the significant Stoic lessons on carrying on with a decent life. Epictetus accepted that way of thinking is a lifestyle and not only a scholastic control. He additionally imagined that every single outer occasion is controlled by destiny and are outside our ability to control we ought to acknowledge whatever happens serenely and impartially. In any case, he contended that people are in charge of their very own conduct, which they can watch and control through intensive discretion. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus (April 121 BC — March 180 BC) Otherwise called Marcus Aurelius, he was the Roman Emperor from March 8, 161 CE to March 17, 180 BC. He moved toward becoming co ruler with his child, Aurelius Commodus from 177 CE until his passing in 180 CE. He was the remainder of the alleged "Five Good Emperors," a progression of kind pioneers who exhibit limitation and equity in their activities. Since quite a bit of his rule was set apart by military clash, Marcus discovered solace in the Stoic way of thinking. He composed the celebrated Stoic journal "The Meditations" in Greek while on a battle between 170 CE and 180 CE as a personal journal of philosophical reflection. Known as a philosopher king inside his lifetime and after his demise, his philosophical compositions are as yet venerated as a literary landmark to the philosophy of Stoicism. Prominent Modern Stoics These people popularized modern stoicism and act as its chief interpreters for the general public. They’re not Stoic Scholars, they’re Stoic “influencers” and practitioners. Ryan Holiday Born on June 16, 1987, Ryan Holiday is a 32 year old American author, marketer, and business person. He works as a media strategist; some of his famous clients include Dov Charney and Tucker Max. Subsequent to dropping out of school at age nineteen, he apprenticed under the strategist and writer Robert Greene, whose books highlight Stoic philosophy. He proceeded to turn into the Director of Marketing at American Apparel, a media feature writer, and the New York Observer’s director at large. Massimo Pigliucci Massimo Pigliucci is an author and the online magazine’s Scientia Salon director in chief. He is also currently a philosophy professor at CUNY City College. He is a candid pundit of creationism and pseudoscience and an advocate for secularism and science educator. In 2015, he wrote a popular piece in the New York Times on Stoicism which ended up as one of the most shared and viewed articles on the site. Donald Robertson Not to be mistaken for the Esteé Lauder Companies' creative director of a similar name, the cognitive behavioral psychotherapist and trainer spend significant time treating anxiety through the utilization of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). As the son of a Freemason, his father’s interest in mysticism inspired him to study Eastern religions such as Taoism, Hinduism, and Buddhism during his teens. The latter of which has a remarkably similar philosophy to Stoicism. He is the writer of "Stoicism and the Art of Happiness," "The Philosophy of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: Stoic Philosophy as Rational and Cognitive Psychotherapy" and his most recent book, "How to Think Like a Roman Emperor: The Stoic Philosophy of Marcus Aurelius”. Chris Fischer A former U.S. Marine, Chris Fischer was introduced with the military variant of Stoicism while serving in the Marine Corps Presidential Helicopter Squadron. After the military, he came back to public service as a law requirement officer and began to study Stoicism seriously in early 2011. At present, he fills in as a detective for a huge law enforcement agency in Florida. He is the host of The Stoicism on Fire podcast and fills in as a guide and mentor at The College of Stoic Philosophers, an open Internet school that encourages a lifelong pursuit of Stoic philosophy and love of wisdom. Lawrence Baker Perhaps the only person that can lay claim to being the closest to a true modern Stoic scholar, Lawrence Baker is as of now a Fellow of Hollins University, where he taught philosophy from 1965 to 1989. His immense contributions to academic philosophy includes where he instructed from 1965 to 1989; the associate editor of the journal Ethics from 1985 to 2000; He became co editor of two editions of the Encyclopedia of Ethics; and he created the book, A New Stoicism a book went for responding to philosophical inquiries, reflecting into a portion of his scholastic papers, the exercises he gained from many years of teaching philosophy, and his favorite Stoic quotes. Chapter 4 The Stoic Happiness Triangle his phrase describes the balance of personal virtues, which maintain a blissful state of life in the whole of humanity. Your stoicism is your resilience factor to the harsh circumstances that you encounter in your life. These virtues form the principles that you need to incorporate in your life to achieve this so called state of stoic happiness. In this state of stoic joy, you can maintain a state of joy, contentment, and fulfillment with your life despite outside influence. These virtues are in the form of a triangle based on the number of your main principles. You have three principles that form the three corners of your triangle. Your triangle also encompasses an eventual state of happiness called Eudaimonia. For your triangle to maintain itself and achieve Eudaimonia, you need to have a balance in all the three principles in your life. Your main principles that form the triangle are: 1. Living your life with aréte 2. You are focusing on what you can control 3. You are taking responsibility for your life 4. You have attained Eudaimonia, which is your ultimate objective The first three principles that form the corners of your stoic happiness triangle are interdependent. Stoicism dictates that your primary policy should focus on things that you can control. These things under your control give you the option to exercise your judgment or take appropriate action. When you choose to make a judgment, you are forming a response to a particular situation outside your control. This judgment results in your need to take responsibility for the effects of your decision. Your other option is concerning the things you can control. You voluntarily choose to take action in this scenario. Your responses should be appropriate to enable you to achieve a better version of yourself. You will get rid of your untoward behavioral aspects and develop better character traits. Your result will be attaining your ideal self identity. All these lifestyle alterations lead you to live with aréte. Once all three of your principles are in harmony, you achieve your state of Eudaimonia. You must understand that your stoic happiness triangle represents a process and not your how to guide to a particular tangible end product. Your life is a continuous process in existence, and so is your Eudaimonia. You will lead a thriving and accomplished life for as long as you maintain a balance in your principles stated above. Eudaimonia Eudaimonia is an ancient Greek philosophical descriptive terminology that you can find in the study or research on virtue ethics. You could simplify this description into always living your happiest life. You are constantly in good spirits every day. It is slightly different from the definition of happiness. Eudaimonia describes your overall standard of joy with your life based on how well you live it. It is a real term and is independent of any outside influence or various interpretations. Eudaimonia is a virtuous state of your mind and body that results from conducting your life morally and ethically. You get a feeling of contentment with your life at all times. Eudaimonia is not limited to a particular instance in time, but your state of mind is in fulfillment at all times. However, happiness per se is the emotional state you experience that gives you a feeling of joy at a specific time. Satisfaction is a subjective emotion and depends on what brings your reactions or responses of pleasure and delight explicitly. Since this emotion is personal, your definition of happiness will differ from one person to another. Your satisfaction is fleeting, but your Eudaimonia is life long if you maintain it appropriately. Furthermore, your Eudaimonia is akin to a state of stoic happiness in your life. This state results from maintaining a balance in your core principles. These principles are living with aréte, taking responsibility and focus on what you control. As earlier explained, Eudaimonia depends on your continual virtuous process. Live with arête This phrase describes being at your best mannered self at a particular moment in time. Your moments eventually comprise your lifetime. Your living with aréte will let you be the best person you can always be in your life. This principle often leads you to live a happy life and even possibly, achieve your Eudaimonia. First, you need to identify and embrace your character's shortcomings. Only then can you start working towards improving yourself to become your best version at all times. You need to determine what your ideal self looks like and how they conduct themselves. Now, thoroughly examine yourself and compare your current self to your perfect person. Identify the gaps that will invariably exist between the two versions. These gaps are the shortcomings that you need to eliminate by adjusting yourself to an aréte lifestyle. This difference in your idealization target is very amenable. Your specific faults represent a failure or deficiency in your behavior or character trait. Your traits are behavioral, and you can adjust yours for the better. Remember that you must always strive to close that gap to become a better person eventually. The following four cardinal virtues are typical in a reasonable person: 1. You have courage You need to identify your best and most appropriate response to a situation that causes you to fear. You can consider yourself courageous when you have this ability to face your source of fright and effectively tackle it in response. To achieve courage, you need to have self confidence, persistence, and bravery within yourself. 2. You have wisdom Wisdom dictates that you fully appreciate an issue or situation. In addition, in response, you equally understand how to react accordingly. Your character traits that will indicate your level of wisdom are your proper sense of perception, self reflection, and exercising excellent judgment. 3. You have Self discipline Your self discipline is your ability to disregard emotional influence when you are coming up with an appropriate course of action. Your self discipline requires proper organization, prior planning, and self control. Psychological influences that will challenge your self discipline are often in the form of your affection, preference, hatred, resistance, lust, and desire. 4. You are just in your judgments This virtue is your sense of justice. You know how to act appropriately with other people. Justice determines your ability to discern what someone deserves for his or her corresponding action. To have judgment, you will need to possess a high level of integrity, sound judgment, and a sense of fairness or neutrality. When you manage to attain these cardinal virtues, then you will be closer to narrowing the gap to your ideal self. The character traits that make up the cardinal virtues are highly essential in your life. You need the features to consider yourself as aréte since you will be closer to living your ideal life. You must always keep in mind that your actions and behavior are what gives a person their value. To be the right person, you also need to have impeccable character and consideration towards others. The opinions and views of your society towards you will become positive. As a result, you will get respect, and your self perception will get a significant boost. Your moral progress is an essential concept within aréte. Your progress will inevitably face various massive challenges on your way to becoming your ideal person. You must learn to identify these potential loopholes, which may trap you and derail your progress towards aréte. If you are not careful, once you have fallen into one of these traps, it then becomes almost impossible for you to resume your moral progression. Your resentment toward the potential prospect of starting all over again will sink your morale and spirits. As a result, you end up falling more in depth into this moral quagmire. Therefore, you must be on the lookout for these minefields. Your appropriate response to these obstacles is to sidestep intelligently or to avoid them entirely. For your benefit, a couple of scenarios will demonstrate the cruelty of your potential moral traps in these succeeding cases. Your deficiency or lack of wisdom is foolish, as you are incapable of comprehension. However, you have a chance to change this negative view by learning virtues and applying them in your everyday life. Your irrational fear of a future that is unknown leads to constant worry. Your agonizing concern over such unknowns that are not within your control is worthless. Your bravery subsides, and you may lose your courageous virtue. You are human, and your attention is prone to potential diversion by moral temptations. You can lose your self discipline when lust and other desires of the flesh overcome your sense of logic. You should always let your brain guide your reasoning, but not your emotions. Your vested interest in an issue under your determination may impair your judgment. Your neutrality becomes non existent in this particular scenario. Your ability to exercise fairness is compromised. Your sense of justice skews due to your perceived bias for or against a given position. Besides, to conduct this lifestyle effectively, you will have to be mindful of others and yourself. You need to be aware of what you are doing and where you are doing it. Ask yourself, is whatever you are doing appropriate? The self awareness to ask yourself such a question is an indication of your mindfulness. You may be put off by the misplaced perception that this principle will require a lot out of you. For instance, you feel the need to be in a constant state of alertness and on the lookout for mistakes or errors. An aréte lifestyle does not have to be this way, not at all. Once you master the art of living with aréte, these factors will become second nature to you. Soon enough, you will subconsciously find yourself exhibiting good virtues without any prompting or self consciousness. All these small changes towards improving your lifestyle will go a long way towards attaining your stoic happiness. You should always strive to conduct yourself with the highest and acceptable moral and ethical standards to consider yourself as living with aréte. Focus on what you control While you are in pursuit of stoic happiness, you should consider this principle as a central component on which to focus. In life, you will realize that there are things that you can control, and other things that you cannot control. Stop wasting your time indulging in the latter, because these things are outside your sphere of influence. If you do not, then the result will be a constant state of worry on your part. You need to appreciate early enough that worrying about things that you cannot control is pointless. Learn to pay more attention to what you can effectively manage. Focus all your energy on such controllable situations. Besides, you may adjust your controlling inputs to your specific preference. If you want a happier life, focus on the issues, which will result in your happiness. Adjust yourself accordingly by controlling what will enable you to achieve this happier outcome. You should involve yourself only with things in which you can effect changes or influence. Stop your habit of constantly worrying about other people and their opinions. Your excessive concern is an expression of your psychological rejection and resistance to your reality. Why should you agonize over what you cannot control? You will find no fulfilling answer to this query. The sooner you realize how futile your anxiety is, the sooner you can get a hold of reality. You need to cease wishing for alternative facts and how things could have been. Concentrate on how the situation is at the moment and learn to face it head on. Let go of your previous expectations and meet your current reality. You cannot do much about issues that are outside your field of jurisdiction. You need to clearly distinguish the situations that are up to you from those that are not. To avoid resenting your life, accept your circumstances and move on from those issues that are beyond your reach. Your voluntary actions and your judgments are the primary examples of things that are often within your control. Your interpretation of an issue and subsequent decision constitutes your judgment. This type of analysis is subjective since it entirely depends on your understanding. Hence, your exercise of personal assessment is within your control. Your voluntary actions are physical or mental activities that constitute your conscious reaction to an issue or situation. Your voluntary actions may be responsive and considerate or reactive and rash. The choice is totally up to you since these actions are within your control. Your body is semi controllable given that your lifestyle will influence your body, but only to a certain extent. You cannot fully control your autonomic system or your specific genetic makeup. However, living with aréte is an aspect of your life that you can control. You have all the power to choose how you want to live your life. Most other things only experience your influence and its effects. In this case, you should understand the difference between your self influence and control. Your self influence over something is not synonymous with your control over the same thing. Your influence guides the general direction of your contributing factors towards your preferred outcome. Your power will determine the specific issue in its entirety. Once you have determined your level and ability of control, you must take appropriate actions or proper functions. These two results are the basis for your judgment and voluntary steps on what you can control. Your appropriate action is whatever responsive action you decide based on your reasoning and your intelligent persuasion. This action is often justifiable for the circumstances in which you find yourself. Your proper functions invariably lead you on a journey of self discovery. This journey results in your effort to become a better version of yourself. Your proper function will eventually result in you living with arête. You have three levels of influence over your surroundings: a. High level of control This influence governs your choice in exercising judgment and your voluntary action. b. Partial influence This influence factors in your character traits, material possessions, and relationship with other people. c. No influence You cannot do anything about your circumstances at this level. You cannot control elements of the weather, your biological makeup, or racial identity. You also do not influence external opinions. You cannot change what is in the past, but your influence can determine the type of future you will have. Remember to control what you can and forget everything outside your sphere of influence. You need to start directing your control towards achieving stoic happiness in your life. Take responsibility You must learn to take responsibility for your life. Your sense of responsibility should take over in spite of uncontrollable events in your life at all times. Your reaction to your surroundings is essential. Your response to things outside of your control is vital as well. Taking responsibility for your life enables you to make the best judgment about specific situations in the course of your life. No one should ever influence your decisions, especially about your own life. This life is yours to do with if what you feel is right for you, and not those others. You are the only one who has to live your life every day. The consequences of any of your actions or inaction will affect you more than others. A life of happiness or depression is typically the result of how you judge and respond to specific situations. When you exercise responsibility, then straight away, whatever happens around you does not matter anymore. You will have the intelligence to consider your appropriate response as opposed to your previous tact of reacting. In alignment with the other principles, you have the freedom to control your reaction to match with the ideal version of yourself. Remind yourself that the goodness or negativity of anything is dependent on your choice of viewpoint. In addition, you should always follow a specific event rather than trying to lead that event. In this manner, you will have ample time to step back, consider the fact, deliberate, and finally, take appropriate action. This path is the responsible way for you to handle your affairs. Furthermore, you must resist the urge to place blame and responsibility elsewhere. Stop your customary routine of blaming others for things that are clearly within your control. Taking responsibility also involves that you can admit to making a mistake or error in your judgment. Instead of assigning guilt somewhere else, you have an opportunity to learn from your mistakes. In addition, you should realize that outside events do not have access to your mind, therefore, only you are responsible for your life. Your emotions that are in response to external circumstances are from within yourself. You are the one who can control them, not others. When you are frustrated by your supervisor or gloomy due to wet weather, you can control how you feel. The causes of your specific emotional state are outside events, and therefore, have no access to your mind. In this case, remember that how you view a particular situation matters to either its positivity or negativity. Your choice to consider these two situations from a negative viewpoint contributes to your negative response (frustration and gloom). Only you can be responsible for how you respond to these outside events. You should beware of developing irrational judgment, which may mislead you in your appropriate response. Your irrational understanding will typically affect your perceived emotional states, both current and future states. For instance, your present pleasure and future appetite are emotions that are prone to your irrational good judgment. However, your present distress and next fear receive your irrational lousy understanding. Responsible decisions should guide you at all times. Acknowledge your missteps, retrace your moves, and adjust accordingly. When you transform this exercise into your daily habit, you will soon attain the stoicism that you deserve. Chapter 5 Stoic Practices Stoic practices center around the fact that the world is unpredictable and people should tune their minds and behavior to view it as such. Stoicism also calls for people to cultivate good virtues despite all the vices in the world. . toicism, a philosophy of life, began as early as the 3rd Century BC. There were three philosophers known for famously practicing stoicism; Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. Seneca was a wealthy power broker and writer; Epictetus was a slave while Marcus was a powerful Roman Emperor. Spiritual Exercises by Seneca from Seneca’s Consolations 1. Practice misfortune Seneca had a great deal of wealth but encouraged people to practice being poor. He stresses that people should not try to visualize poverty but instead, they should get away from the comfort of their homes, go out into the streets, and learn what being poor is. Once a person comes face to face with whatever they dread, they may not find it as bad as they thought it was. They are also likely not to feel shaken if by some chance misfortune befalls on them. 2. Keep a journal All three famous philosophers; Epictetus, Marcus, and Seneca had a habit of journaling. Seneca would do it in the evening just before going to bed. He would recall everything he did during the day including the words that he had spoken. Since he could not keep any secrets from himself, he noted every tiny little detail of his day. After completing the exercise, Seneca says he would sleep the sweetest sleep. What stoic material is available today is because people took the time to write down their thoughts. Journaling is important as makes people reflect on their day and what they have learned, and enables them to also put what they have noted to constant practice. 3. Practice Negative visualization Negative visualization looks at the possible worst thing that could happen thus preparing a person accordingly. All three philosophers seemed to agree that people should be prepared for the inevitable setbacks or situations in life be it death, unforeseen changes, or external factors. Seneca would anticipate the worst case scenarios by noting down all the possible things that could happen when he was, for example, traveling. He would consider the possibility of the ship he was traveling in being taken over by pirates or the possibility of encountering a storm while at sea or the possibility that the captain of the ship could become ill and be able to control the ship. This way, Seneca was always prepared for any disruption. 4. Fight egos People who are egoistic cannot learn and progress because they believe that they are already excellent. Their blown up self esteem hinders them from learning and growing. Therefore, Seneca not only advises people to fight their egos but to also fight flattery that is undeserved and refuse praise that describes the complete opposite of what a person is. He encourages people to accept accolades that are given moderately and warns people against fraternizing with people who only know how to give false praise. 5. Choose a role model Having a role model is critical in life as pointed out by Seneca. A good role model provides a standard by which a person can live by and acts as a ruler to help straighten what is crooked. The role model can also provide guidance in dealing with difficult situations or circumstances. Seneca says that this person can be someone whose way of living and words that they speak pleases you, or it can be a person who matches their character to their faces. 6. Never be a slave of your wealth Seneca was a master of his wealth. He loved and enjoyed being rich but had also learned how to use his wealth as well as how to live without it. He advises people not to be too protective of their fortune that they develop a fear of losing it. People who act in such a manner are said to be salves of their wealth and are far from being wise men. A wise wealthy man enjoys having his wealth but does not love it to the point that it controls him. He also enjoys having wealth in his house but not in his heart. The wise will also continue gathering as much wealth as he can and continue to put his virtues into practice with it. 7. Accept fate Stoics only give attention to that which they can control and leave things like fate to its own will. They use the analogy of a dog tied to a moving cart to show how not accepting fate can make life hard. A wise man who loves his fate is compared to a playful dog that runs alongside a moving cart at whichever pace the cart is being driven at. A foolish man, on the other hand, is likened to a dog that refuses to move while the cart is in motion. No matter how much it does not want to move, it will still be dragged along. In the same way, people should accept whatever fate befalls them without complaining. Rather than try to change the reality of situations, people should accept life and enjoy the journey as much as they can. Those who choose to fight their fate will only end up miserable. Spiritual exercises from Epictetus’ Enchiridion 1. Manage impressions Epictetus encourages people to examine their impressions, impressions being a person’s response to what they hear from people, other people’s behavior, and occurrences in their life. He continues to explain that people should use their logic rather than emotions to assess and deliberate situations. If a situation is within their control, then they should do whatever they need to do. However, if a situation is beyond their control then they should not concern themselves with it. 2. Accept that people and things are impermanent Many emperors at the time Epictetus was writing about this philosophy had lost their children and other dear ones to war and diseases. By reminding themselves that people were mortal, the emperors, and people, in general, were in a way anticipating their inevitable loss. Sentimental objects were also treated in a similar manner. When they broke or got lost, a person would accept his or her loss and move on. 3. Consider the force of nature Epictetus also seeks to remind people that they should take into consideration external factors when planning for anything. According to him, many external things beyond a person’s control can affect the outcome of what a person sets out to do so people should anticipate them. 4. Put your virtues to test Stoics should put their virtues to practice every single opportunity that they get. For example, a man or woman can only exercise self restraint the moment they encounter a beautiful woman or a handsome man. Epictetus also gives an example of discovering endurance, especially when faced with pain. 5. Pause before reacting In addition to people examining their impressions, they should also take a moment before reacting to a situation. According to Enchiridion XX, this ensures that the person is able to maintain control of the situation. The pause also serves to give a person the opportunity to formulate a more objective reaction to a situation. 6. Other izing Other izing shows people how they tend to react differently to a situation especially if it affects them. People tend to be more pitiful of their circumstances and less pitiful of their neighbors in the same circumstance. For example, a person may be more upset when they lose a loved one and more self pitiful to their situation. They might not show as much concern when it is a friend suffering through the same predicament. 7. Speak less and listen more Epictetus says that people should strive to speak less a good percentage of the time and when they speak, they should only talk of that which is necessary and keep their statements brief. They should not talk about common things such as horses, sports, and food neither should they speak about other people whether it is praising or gossiping them. In Enchiridion XX XIII.14, Epictetus also discourages people from talking about their deeds and adventures. He points out that other people do not necessarily enjoy listening to other people’s achievements as much as they enjoy listening to their own achievements. 8. Choose friends wisely The kind of company a person keeps affects them significantly, and this is something even ancient philosophers understood all too well. Epictetus, for instance, warned philosophers of the dangers of mixing with non philosophers and clean people mixing with dirty people. 9. Take insults lightly As hard as this can be for some people, Epictetus believed that humor was one of the best ways of dealing with insults. Rather than get upset and try to defend yourself, he encouraged people to respond to insults with self deprecation. This would likely make the abuser embarrassed and save a person from responding in a similar manner as you abuser. 10. Do not be too hasty in judging Just because a person drinks too much, Epictetus warns that a person should not assume that they drink badly instead, the person should first understand why a person does what he does before condemning them to a behavior. Spiritual exercises from Marcus Aurelius’ Meditations 1. Cooperate with others People should learn to exist with one another as seen in Meditation II.1. Marcus continues to explain this by saying that when a stoic encounters people who are arrogant, envious, ungrateful, or vile in any way, he should ignore their behavior and continue to cooperate with them. He should not think of taking action against them, as it would be wrong and because people act in ill mannered ways out of ignorance of what is good and what is evil. 2. Have your principles at hand A stoic should have his tools ready just as a doctor is always prepared to treat a patient with his or her tools when the need arises. In the same way, human beings should have material that reminds them of what matters in life and what they need to do to strengthen unity among them and the divines. 3. Have a purpose According to Meditation IV. 2, people should live life with a purpose. Marcus knows that is in the nature of human beings to do so he only seeks to remind them to question why they choose what it is that they do constantly. 4. Renounce wealth In Meditations, V.15 Marcus talks about how a man should train himself to do without material possessions and otherworldly things. This way, he can do without them when he loses them. A man who takes part in this exercise is always grateful for what he has. 5. Acknowledging other people’s good Stoics encourage people to delight themselves in the good of other people. People should appreciate good virtues, modest behavior, and admirable qualities in the people that surround them. They should also put what they see as good behavior to practice or use such people as role models. 6. Understand other people’s perspective Meditations VII.26 reminds people that they should make a habit of looking at things from other people’s perspectives before reacting or passing judgment. It is only after doing so, that a person can understand why the other party behaved the way they did or did what they did. 7. Take a view from above This is another good exercise for the stoics. It involves looking at a situation from other angles in order to gain a better perspective of it. One such angle is forming an image of the situation with the whole world in mind. Suddenly, the stressful situation will begin to appear trivial and useless. 8. Change and death are inevitable Similar to Epictetus who believed in the impermanence of things including human beings, Marcus also believed that death was imminent. In addition to this, he also wrote that change is unavoidable and people should always be ready for it and be ready to adjust accordingly. Since the two are also inevitable, people should not focus too much on them, instead, they should concentrate on the present and their purpose in life. 9. Check the spec in your eye When a person offends you, Marcus’s Meditations says that you must first look at yourself and check to see whether you have done any wrong before reacting, confronting, or judging other people. 10. Morning reflection Marcus believed that a man ought to examine himself every day to align himself with his purpose in the universe. He suggests that a man should pick a spot where he can see the sun rising and take a moment to reflect on his life. Stoic Practices to Apply Today Some stoic practices are still applicable today. A number of people live by some of the stoic principles without even realizing it because some of the behaviors that stoics practice are acceptable by different cultures across the world. They also make common sense to a majority of people. 1. Managing impressions Managing our reaction to events is very important in life. This stoic principle teaches human beings to recognize that which they can change and that which they cannot. For example, if a flight delays due to bad weather, this principle teaches that a person ought not to get upset over the situation, stress about it, or react to it by shouting at the airline crew. On the contrary, the person should patiently wait for the situation to change or accept their outcome. Living by this decision can make you live a happier stress free life. 2. Keeping a journal Keeping a journal can be very therapeutic. By noting down the events of the day, a person can reflect on the things he or she was able to accomplish and the things he or she learned. A person can also refer to the same entries for wisdom. Writing and reading lessons on a day to day basis as opposed to just listening to words of wisdom, you change to a better person. You can also monitor your progress and appreciate your old way of thinking. 3. Having a role model Today, many people follow influential people they admire and look up to for guidance. A role model can be any person such as a parent, a leader, a friend, a celebrity, a relative, or a colleague that you admire. In the face of a difficult situation, a person can look up to their role model and ask what he or she would do. Once they answer this question, they can proceed to act in the same way and overcome their problem. 4. Negative visualization Negative visualization can also be applied in today’s world. For example, if a person has a presentation to carry out, they can think of all the possible things that could go wrong and anticipate what to do in the event that something actually goes wrong. This way they are not caught unaware and are able to have an easier time accepting whatever fate befalls them. Negative visualization can be scary to some people, so people are normally at free will to decide on their potential catastrophes. You can make it also a fun exercise. You can even involve other people in your life. For example, you can ask your partner or spouse to imagine with you where both of you would be if you had not met one another. 5. Practicing poverty Practicing poverty is also possible. A person can decide to sleep on the floor occasionally to get a better feel of how they would cope in the event their home and bed were to be taken away. This exercise also serves to remind people to be grateful for the things that they have. 6. Testing virtues People should always put their virtues to test. One way they can do this is to test their endurance to pain or their endurance through difficult situations. A person can start by first imagining about any difficult situations that they may encounter, then arm themselves with the necessary tools to overcome any overwhelming feelings. At the end of the difficult period, they can mentally check to see how they dealt with the situation and what most helped them to overcome their problem. 7. Accepting fate Stoic practices teach people that they should accept their fate no matter what it is so that they can continue to enjoy life’s journey rather than be dragged along. Whatever circumstances you are in should not dampen your spirit; you should accept them and move on with your life. Remaining fixated on that, which you have no control over, only leaves you feeling more miserable. 8. Having morning reflections Having early morning reflections is important. You can start by being thankful for the fact that you have seen another day. You can then go ahead to plan your day noting down how you are going to put your virtues to test as well, as to how you will avoid vices. You can decide on how you are going to react to the events of the day as well as other people’s behavior. 9. Having evening reflections Bedtime reflection is just as important as the moming reflection. It is an opportunity to reflect on what you have done throughout the day and to check on whether you lived up to the expectations you set out for yourself. You can note down how you cultivated your virtues and what vices you overcame throughout the day. Anything that was not achieved during that particular day can be pushed to the next day for action. 10. Taking a bird’s view In today’s world, it is important to take a step back and look at the bigger picture by relating yourself and your circumstances to the world. It is interesting how most things will appear less important and minute when looked at from this angle. Guided meditation can be an excellent way of achieving such a perspective. Chapter 6 Important Ideas in Stoicism ancient Greco Roman philosophy of Stoicism naturally evolved over time. Stoic beliefs morphed throughout the three phases of its history: Early Stoa, Middle Stoa, and Late Stoa. Most of what we know about Stoicism comes from the philosophers of the Late Stoa since only the works of that period survived antiquity. Jen like religions, the concepts within any philosophy, including the The Stoic Egg The ancient Stoic philosophers believed that practical ethics was the most indispensable part of their way of thinking. To practice ethics was to carry on with a real existence in the most ideal manner conceivable. In any case, they likewise believed that it is trying to create suitable morals without two different segments: the comprehension of how the world capacities and esteeming the power and cutoff purposes of human reasoning. In a nutshell, they believed that Stoicism was made of three regions of study: “logic,” “ethics,” and “physics.” The Stoics used several metaphors to explain how they thought of this philosophical inquiry. The most popular is that of an egg. I want you to think of a hard boiled egg. Imagine its shell, yellow yolk, and white albumen (or egg whites; it’s the glossy liquid inside that lightens and puffs up dessert recipes like meringues and mousses, when whisked). The shell corresponds to what the Stoics called “logic”; the albumen for “ethics”; and the yolk corresponds to “physics.” An egg was the perfect metaphor to illustrate how the different parts of philosophy are interdependent and should not be studied by itself. Henceforward the egg: ethics hovers in between the hard shell of logic and the soft core of “physics.” The Egg Shell for “Logic” The shell corresponds to what the Stoics called “logic.” Nowadays, this term is better understood as the study of reason or the theory of knowledge. The Stoic study of “logic? encompassed rhetoric, epistemology, psychology, and all related social sciences. They believed that knowledge can be attained by reason and the seemingly modern idea that knowledge can be accomplished distinctly by subject skill to aggregate judgment. Stoic logic encompasses the investigation of rationale as we barely comprehend it these days, in addition, to talking, epistemology just as brain science and related sociologies. The Stoics developed an arrangement of logic alternative in contrast to that of Aristotle, which was to a great extent overlooked all through the medieval times and beyond. It started to be acknowledged again with the cutting edge approach of propositional logic or sentimental logic. The Albumen for “Ethics” The albumen or egg whites corresponds to “ethics.” For the ancient Greeks and Romans, ethics didn’t only refer to the study of right and wrong. It also encompasses a more broad knowledge of what kind of life you want to live and the society you want to build. The Yolk for “Physics” The yolk corresponds to “physics,” which was once called natural philosophy. Nowadays, the term natural philosophy is really a combination of natural and social sciences, in addition to the subject of metaphysics. Stoic physics incorporated the cosmological thought that the universe started in a pneuma (Greek: nve Õ pa) or "breath of life". This inestimable cosmic fire began life and the universe and will annihilate both life and the universe a similar way, just to start once more. Ethics and Practical Philosophy There is a confusion that Stoicism is tied in with quelling or smothering your feelings and experiencing existence with a hardened upper life. Also, no, Mr. Spock, the fictional character in Star Trek, was not a Stoic. Gene Rodenberry, the actor who played the role, certainly incorporated some aspects of Stoicism into the character but Mr. Spock had traits that are un Stoic. Epictetus himself cautioned, “For I should not be unfeeling like a statue”. The ancient Stoics were nothing like the Vulcan Mr. Spock; they’re not in any way interested in completely purging themselves of emotion. Instead, the Stoics taught to transform destructive emotions and harness positive emotions to achieve inner calm. In more specific terms, the Stoics wanted us to recognize propathos (natural response) and eupathos (emotions coming about because of a right judgment). To feel emotions such as fear, anger, or love are part of human nature; it’s instinctive to show human responses in specific circumstances. Keep in mind, the feeling can't be maintained a strategic distance from. In any case, intelligent personality can remove itself from crude and unhelpful emotions. We can contemplate whether the emotion we’re feeling should be accepted, cultivated, or avoided. The ultimate goals were to accomplish apatheia, which comes about from practicing clear judgment keeping up poise throughout everyday life. The ancient Stoics put stock in the idea of eudaimonia (often translated as “flourishing”) happiness, fulfillment, or the good life. This is attained by cultivating moral virtues that’ll help you become a good person. These moral virtues are wisdom, courage, justice, and temperance. The Four Cardinal Virtues of Greek Philosophy The four cardinal virtues professed by the Stoics were: Wisdom, Courage, Justice, and Temperance. Its origins are unknown. Most researchers and scholars of ancient history agree that the ideas around these four cardinal virtues are from the time of Plato or Socrates, most likely much further. If you’ve ever taken a philosophy class in college, you’ll notice conflicting definitions of Greek philosophical terms one textbook says this, the other States that, but my professor describes it differently. This is common in the study of philosophy. People often have differing explanations, descriptions, or definitions of Greek philosophical terms. This has caused so much confusion, speculation, and debate among philosophy students throughout millennia. Astoundingly, we have a Greek philosophical dictionary that survived antiquity. The book is called Definitions (Greek: “O poi Horoi), which is believed to be written by Speusippus, one of Plato’s students. Definitions were obviously written for the followers of Platonism, not Stoicism. There are no surviving writings regarding the Stoic meanings of the cardinal virtues, anyway knowing how Platonists described theirs surely helps us. The following are the four cardinal ideals of the Greek way of thinking: Wisdom, Courage, Justice, and Temperance; and my personal take on each. Don’t worry if you don’t understand it at first. The cardinal virtues and Greek philosophical terms can be quite confusing and require a bit of deconstructing, construing, or “reading between the lines” to make sense of. Prudence or Wisdom (Phronésis ôr sophia) (Greek: opovioic; oogia) Prudence or wisdom is maybe the most significant and most broad of the cardinal virtues since it alludes to the immovably got a handle on the information of what is great, awful, and uninterested throughout everyday life. In reality, all the cardinal virtues can be comprehended as insight connected to our activities or good wisdom. Basically, the value of prudence is the comprehension of the most significant things throughout everyday life or getting a handle on the estimation of things objectively. The opposite of it is ignorance. For the Stoics, prudence is the act of immovably getting a handle on the nature of good: understanding that wisdom or prudence is the main veritable good. Thusly, it is immovably related to the importance of love of wisdom or “philosophy.” Prudence can also refer to our ability to discern the value of different external things rationally, a concept the Stoics called axia (Greek: a € 1a). When we decide between two seemingly essential things, for example, contemplating whether to prioritize our health or wealth, we are in essence practicing axis; thus, we’re exercising prudence or wisdom. As I've discussed, the old Stoics separated their syllabus into Logic, Ethics, and Physics. The ancient Stoic philosophers may have related sensibility with the subject of Stoic Logic, which consolidates intellectual inquiry into and epistemology. It may also be related to Epictetus’ practice called the Discipline of Assent, which concerns our ability to sanction, or not, on our “impressions.” For example, I hear a loud sound outside my window. I may jump in autonomic reaction or immediately grab hold of the nearest self defense weapon I can find, reflecting my sudden fear. However, after using my “ruling faculty” to conduct a rational examination, I discover that it was merely a stray cat rummaging through my metal trash can. Courage or Fortitude (Andreia ôr fortitudo) (Greek: å vépeta, X0€voc) This is one of the easiest virtues to understand. Courage or fortitude clearly means just that the act of bravery or valor. But the Stoics also extends its meaning to incorporate continuance of agony and distress. It is something contrary to timidity or cowardice. This virtue combines well with the virtue of moderation. The two of them allude to the mastering our passions, directing our desires, and to confront our feelings of dread head on. The two of which correspond with Epictetus' celebrated proverb: endure and renounce. The virtue of fortitude or courage grants us to experience dread, what's more, the virtue of moderation empowers us to deny unwanted wants. Seneca accepted that these virtues can't exist without some hint of dread and desire to master. The Stoics even demand that the most astute among us requires fearlessness and balance since the person is as yet powerless against the first developments of passions or "proto passions." This is known as Propatheiai, which is our instinctive reaction to events. For instance, I may look at an attractive woman and suddenly have the impression of lust. If I “assent” or act upon my propatheiai, then I develop a desire to get in bed with her. Stobaeus, the fifth century compiler treasured series, and extracts from Greek authors once commented that the ancient Stoics characterized fearlessness or guts as the "information of what is awful, what isn't horrendous, and what is not one or the other." As one of four cardinal virtues of Stoicism, mental fortitude is critical on the grounds that it is simply the capacity to apply notwithstanding hazard. As indicated by Aristotle, the highest risk was death and that the most courageous man was the one that acted bravely notwithstanding it. Remember, fear is and will always be present. We all fear something. But the brave person does not feel less dread than the coward. What separates him or her is the ability to act in spite of fear. To be able to muster up the nerve to face adversity head on is what makes that person courageous. Temperance (Sophrosyneé) (Greek: o@@poovvn) The virtue of temperance alludes to moderation, self restraint, or self control. It likewise identifies with mindfulness or acting naturally had. It is firmly connected to the cutting edge idea of "care." something contrary to restraint is wantonness or salacity. As indicated by Stobaeus, the ancient Stoics accepted that the ethicalness of moderation involves learning of "what is to be picked, maintained a strategic distance from, and neither one of its". directs our expectations to follow up on specific driving forces or wants. Diogenes Laërtius composed that the Stoic scholars, eminently Chrysippus, characterized moderation fundamentally as good self discipline (eutaxia, Greek: E ò tag i a) and propriety (kosmistés, Greek: kxoopótnta). By viewing enters in a detached way, like how a philosophical thinker or physicians see the world, the ancient Stoics meant to accomplish a target portrayal of themselves, suspending any positive or negative decisions or inclinations. This disposes of or possibly diminish dread or want. As it were, it is like the cutting edge thought of objectivity and scientific detachment. The Stoics practiced temperance as an approach to transcend their feelings of trepidation and wants and accomplish apatheia or opportunity from undesirable interests and connections to external things. Justice (Dikaiosuné) (Greek: 5uxa.oovvn) The Ancient Stoics did mean justice in the authentic sense, yet what may be moral in our dealings with the most part. For example, they take it to look past a mother's frame of mind towards her kids or our feeling of devotion towards the divine beings. In the ancient past, the term equity was frequently more comprehensively deciphered as “righteousness.” The virtue of equity is chiefly made out of the subordinate temperance of decency and thoughtfulness. In spite of the fact that it might be clear, this cardinal virtue is a more extensive idea of social temperance, which references to kindheartedness, altruism, or sympathy toward others found in Stoic compositions, for the most part through Emperor Marcus Aurelius' own personal journal, The Meditations. The philosopher king himself says that justice is the most significant of ethics. The term justice or fairness was viewed mostly as good insight connected to our activities, transcendently identified with other people individually or society as a whole. The writings of Joannes Stobaeus stated that the ancient Stoics described the virtue of justice as the learning of the conveyance of appropriate an incentive to every individual. Diogenes says the Stoic philosophers divided the cardinal virtue of justice into two categories: Impartiality (isotés or aequalitas) and courtesy or kindness (eugnémosuné). It might likewise have associated with the Stoic Ethics, the learning of the dissemination of appropriate an incentive to every individual around the tenet that virtue is the only genuine good. It includes legislative issues and the connected Discipline of Action by Epictetus. Modern authors, on the other hand, would merely allude to it as morality or social virtue. The opposite of this virtue is when we are unjust or have been done morally wrong by another person. Chapter 7 The Science of Letting Go of the Past and Living in the Present et go of the past by cutting out any attachment you have especially with painful memories. The memories may be dragging you back without your knowledge. Forget about your past pains, and you Start accepting what the future has in store for you. You need to fight the past and stop letting discouragement or disappointment bring you down. Move on with life and make things sail away as they should. Release the thoughts that are built up in you, habits, fears as well as worries. Detach yourself from the past emotions that make you resentful so that you can face the future an active person. If you do not let go of the past, you will suffer bad relations, jealous as well as envy. Letting go needs you to have a determination and work daily on your life. There are things that you can involve in your daily practice so that you can leave that past behind and have a good future. They include and not limited to; Making Peace with the Past It is time that you agree that what happened at that time belongs to the past and not the future. Do not let that bring you down or tie you to an extent you cannot live a healthy future. Thinking about the bad things that have gone will not help you in any way. That will do you more harm than good. Though your mind will keep bringing back the painful memories, you need to replace them with positive ones with immediate effect. Be smart and creative to counter any negative thought that wants to remind you about what you did in the past. Teach your mind to think about a positive tomorrow when the past tries to haunt you. That will in no time become a habit, and you will eventually find yourself letting go of the range you have. You can practice mindfulness as a technique to replace the negative thoughts. When you bring your focus to the present, the past will have a lesser impact on your future. Practice living the present, and you will be hurt less and as well be in a position to control the hurt. You are free to choose the things you want in life, and you have to make a wise decision so that you can live the life of your expectations. Face your Fears Fear can be the thing that is holding you back from letting go of your past. To continue with a healthy life, you have to face your concerns as well as disappointment. Cut your connection with the fears, and you will make it in life. You have to keep trying, and eventually, you will make it. People will often have a fear of being in grief, sadness, anger, as well as disappointment. Do not shut out such feelings; instead, give them a chance to flow out of you. When you decide to fight them, you will be left stuck, and you will find it hard to move on. Do not avoid the negative emotions from the past since that will make you dwell in the past. Naturally, a person will find a means to counter any pain that will come their way. Spending most of your time trying to distract your feeling will not initiate a disconnection. Finding something which you like doing so that you will take your mind off the past will yield no fruits. You need to know that the more you do that, the more you will get hurt. Focusing on such things will only drain your energy. When you feel as if you cannot do it on your own, find someone you think will help you get over the past. Practice Being Gentle with Yourself Show yourself some compassion as well as kindness so that the past can stop tormenting you. Do not criticize yourself when you get in a painful situation. Treat yourself in the same way you would treat the person you love. If you do not love yourself, you will have a hard time fighting with the past, and that means that your future will be full of bruises. Even though the hurt is in no way inevitable, treat yourself with at most love as well as a kindness if it will come. Practice self care once you are hurt, and that will be a way of setting clear boundaries. Say no to the things that harm you and do the things that bring you joy as well as comfort you not forgetting to handle your needs first. When you learn to implement self care daily, you will empower yourself, and there will be an overwhelming feeling. Put all the focus on yourself and address the resentment built up in you. Try and bring yourself to the present any time that you feel that your thoughts the drifting toward the past. Pay attention to the things that you are grateful for and not what hurts you. Do not wait for an Apology You know you are firm when you accept an apology from someone who has wronged you, and they do not apologize. Expecting someone to apologize is the worst mistake that you will ever make. That will make you go slow in letting the past go and, in most cases, this is when that person does not care what happens to your future. Do not expect them to take care of your healing: instead, you should take care of your healing process. The pain, as well as, hurt that is built up in you doesn’t affect the person who hurt you, it affects you. Do not wait for the person to make an apology. In fact, don’t expect them to do so. When you do that, you will speed up your healing, and the quicker you will be able to let go. Work on your forgiveness since waiting for them to apologize will stall the entire process. Forgiveness is an essential thing to do since it will relieve you from the shame, anger, sadness as well as the guilt that is in you. Be Free to Talk About It When passing through the hard times, you should find someone that you can speak with them about it. When you speak it out, it will be one way to help you heal, and you will let it go. When you don't talk about it, you will never improve and dwelling in the past will hold your life back. Do not feel ashamed or feel as if it is embarrassing to talk about it to the people around you. Find someone who will be patient enough with you and willing to offer you the help they can get so that you can leave the past behind. You can as well sort for professional advice once you feel as if you have no one you can trust. When you talk to a therapist, the struggle to let go of will go decreasing, and finally, you will manage. When you come across a professional who has experience in such matters, they will guide you on how to implement the process. Practice Mindfulness Practicing mindfulness is a way to train the brain to live in the present and focus your awareness on the senses and not the thoughts. Focus your attention on the things that are happening at the moment. Leave alone what went on some time back and let it remain as history. Aim at noticing every activity that is and let the mind float without any attachment. Make it a practice, and you will get it easy to refocus your thoughts on what is going on in the present. Find a starting point and begin so that you can let go of the past. It may be a hard thing to do, but once you can practice that, you will find ideas flowing in the right direction. Create a Distance It will be of help to you if you create a gap between the person, or situation, that is continually reminding you if the past. Whatever that is making, you upset should not be anywhere close to you. It is not a bad idea to put a physical distance from the person to who is making you dwell in your past. Create a psychological range as well from any circumstance that is taking you back to the past. You need to avoid anyone that is advising you that battling with the past will not help you in any way. No one should discourage you from processing the past since it will be an excellent approach to use so that you can heal. Be Creative Creativity when it comes to real life is a way to let go of your past. When you engage your mind in creating new beginnings as well as things, you will have less time to dwell in the past. Open up your thoughts to new opportunities and do the things that will make you happy. Seek to meet new people when the ones who are with you discourage you from moving in that direction. You need to embrace change whenever it comes your way. Take a different course and guidance when things seem to make a change. It will work for you since change is as good as rest. Yearn to discover more, and that will help you to let go of the anger that you feel in you due to your past mistakes. Work with a Positive Attitude You need to create affirmative phrases that you need to keep reminding yourself once the painful past tries to find a way in you. The way you talk to yourself will determine whether you will move forward or you will still keep moving steps backward. The more you talk positively to yourself, the more you can leave the past behind. You can reframe your mind often when you practice a mantra that you will be telling yourself when you are in a painful as well as an emotional moment. Train your mind to think about the possible and not the impossible. In that way, you will move forward more efficiently and forget how the future was treating you. Bring the people that see the good in you closer. You need to as well focus on your strengths rather than your weaknesses. You need to know that both the positive and the negative experiences in your life will help shape the future. You will come across people, situations, as well as events, that will determine who you will be in the days to come. Be wise that you will not focus on the negative ones and the ones that will bring you to hurt. That will help you overcome any experience that will be similar to the one in the past. And you will not be biased. You will be hit by mental blindness in the future when you decide to focus on the negative side alone. Spending all your time in fighting impossibility at the moment will tie your spiritual resources, keeping you away from a good life. You will make a difference with the way you are going to deal with the painful past. Bear in mind that emotional pain will keep you away from healing. You need to simplify your life so that the unforeseen consequences will not hit you. Living in the past will only rob your present joy. Choose to live in the future, and you will find it exciting and have a healthy and meaningful life. Live in the present moment, and the future will have a smooth flow. When you learn how to let go of the past, seek to know how you need to live. Focus on living in the present. Leaving the past behind is not only an important thing but living the resent is a wise decision to make. Mourning the past will make you worry about the present as well as the future. It will make you always anticipate troubles, and you will have it hard to cope with life. Aim for the best, and you are going to find it enjoyable living in the present moment. Make a conscious decision and be in control of every situation celebrating every small achievement that you make. Chapter 8 How to Become Unattached To External Things etaching yourself is healthy, especially when it involves going away from toxic people. You will benefit if you disconnect from things that do not help you. Separating is a practice that should be done once you find yourself in entanglements that drag you behind. Find happiness as you disconnect yourself from unhealthy attachments using the following approaches. Know the Reason You Want to Detach Know why you need to disconnect from the attachments you have been holding on to. They are a hindrance to your success. Ask yourself in what way you are going to do it and the appropriate time to start the process. It will be hard for you to do it if you have enough reason to do that. As you seek to detach yourself, have a concrete goal that you are clinging on. The aim must be convincing to you why you need to leave a particular thing. The reason will be the one to help you each day to stay firm to disconnect yourself slowly. The goal should not stop once you get to some point in your journey. The reason should help you realize yourself even when you feel like there is no more hope. It should have a direct connection with the thing or person you intend to detach. Find the exact cause and how it is affecting you as well as the people around you. Release Let the thing that is depriving your happiness go so that you can be at peace. It will be of great help if you let it go. The longer you keep holding on to it, the more it will harden and hurt you, the more. You will end up blowing if you keep holding onto something that is not beneficial to you. Some things are toxic, and they need to be left alone. Do the things that you know will help you to let them go. You can even decide to pen down the thoughts that are pissing you off and analyze one by one and how to go about them. When you need to let go of a person, at times you might find yourself crying. If that is the only way feel that can make you release them, then you can go ahead and do it. When you learn to release someone or something, you will find the attachment you were having declining slowly with time. There are numerous ways that you can release something, but you have to make sure it will be harmless. Decide the amount of time that you will use to let go, but you should not take an eternity. The approach that will make you remain calm is the best option to use. Your harmony is the most important thing above everything else. It is all about you and the feeling that comes along with your attachment to that particular thing. Our opinions are what makes us the people we are, and no one should judge you for the way you feel. Do it Little by Little You do not have to burden yourself, all you have to do is start small, and finally, you will manage to break the attachment. Time is all that you need to perform such a big task. Do not shock yourself but instead try harder and as days go by, you will detach completely. It is not easy, but eventually, it will be possible. It is painful to detach from something or someone close to you, but if they are of no gain, you have no choice but initiate a detachment. Start with removing anything that is a constant reminder of them. You have the right to decide what you will start by eliminating. You may feel that you cannot let some things off the hook, but it is time you earn that holding on them will not help. Do not push too hard to the extent that you will tire before you are through with the entire process. When you do that, you might lose the focus and forget what you were aiming for. You will be forced to start from the first step when you lose the reason why you are pushing for the detachment. Seek as well as Look Forward Look for help as you seek a new start and living a new life. You need to have something that you are focusing on. That will serve as a motivator of going on with the process daily. As you are slowly letting go, you need to find a new thing that will always remind you that you have to keep holding on. Something to tell you that you have a better future ahead away from whatever that is distracting you. Do not dwell on pain that you felt in the past but fix your eyes on a better tomorrow. There is a sweet tomorrow before you, and that is what should motivate you to keep fighting. Imagine the joy that you will have once you manage to draw away the extemal things that are holding your success. Let the imaginations that you have the fuel you to detach as fast as you can. Do not let anyone whisper defeat because if you give the surrounding a chance to drive you, you will eventually give up. Stay positive on whatever the outcome will be, and you will find satisfaction in the whole process. As you seek something exciting, look forward to great results. Do not take Shortcuts Detaching from something will take time, and for that, you need to have a lot of patience. There are no alternative routes to use, and you have to follow the right channel so that you can get to the results you desire. There has never been an easy way to detach from something that you have been with for some time. It turns out to be difficult and painful as well. But with the time, you will realize that there isn’t much pain than holding on to someone or something that you are not worth fighting. You have to take heart and be active as you detach yourself and start the journey of reinventing yourself. Think forward and do not Look Back There are no chances for you to pull back from the journey that you are set on. All the steps that you have gone through are essential, and you cannot lose focus at this juncture. When you think of looking back, you will be killing yourself slowly, and that will mean all has been in vain. When you look back from where you started it all, you will have more reasons to give up than to continue pushing. Despite there being many reasons to give up, pushing on will result in your freedom at the end of the tough journey of detaching. When you look back, you find things that will distract you from what the present, as well as the future, has for you in store. You will not move any further when you get used to looking back. The past could hold Sweet memories, but they are things that you cannot keep holding on to forever. The past may be harboring secrets that are tormenting you in addition to fears that are needless. Do not give up your future because of the history that you do not want to let go of. You should always be thinking of good things that are about to happen once you get away from some things. You can end up having better as well as healthier attachments once you let go of the unnecessary ones. You will be a better and happy person in the end. Have the determination to achieve what is before you rather than what you already have. Learn to Forgive and Forget Forgiving is a vital thing when you want to detach from things. Do not let pride take you over because that will harm the inner you. Give no chance for pride to win the battle since that is the number one thing that will destroy everything. Pride will make you say things that you will come to regret later. It will open up fresh wounds. Forgive yourself for having involved yourself in the things that hurt you but know that it is time to detach completely. Once you forgive, you will have peace of mind and the strength to continue fighting. It will make you comfortable to know that there is nothing which is holding you back from detaching with toxic things and the environment. Forgiving may take quite some time, but it is much worth it. It will help you to separate with no traces of resentment in you. You not only have to forgive, but you will have to put it behind you. You may not be in a position to forgive and forget, but you need to make sure that once you remember that situation, there will be no pain in you. Forgiveness will take you a step ahead when it comes to cutting the attachment that you once had. Healing Wounds may take time to heal, but as time goes on, you will recover completely. The scars that you have maybe the reason why you want to disconnect so that you can heal. You can be in an attachment that is bringing you sorrow than joy. You have to cut the connection that there is so that you will stop suffering. There comes a time that you feel your wounds are, and you wonder how you are going to heal. You need to detach yourself, and they will improve with time. Do not tear yourself apart so that you retain attachments that are bringing you scars. Try to heal for your sake and not for the others. Always be Grateful Appreciate the pain as well as the sorrow that you have. The memories that come along should be something to enjoy whether good or bad. Be thankful that you have found a reason to end the attachment and move on. There are numerous things, as well as people, to be grateful. Detachment is a process, and it should be a reminder that you have to be happy without some things in life. Focus on the best side of issues, and you will have a reason to keep moving. Be grateful that the disconnection will give you a chance to look for healthier as well as beneficial attachments. You will have an opportunity to know your worth, and for that, you will learn to appreciate yourself. Move Forward The time that you have spent trying to detach yourself has been a success, and the next logical thing that you need to go is to move on with your life. The time has come for you to go forward without looking at what you have left behind. It is a chance to live a happy and healthy life away from toxic things. You have come to a great beginning, and you have to realize that and find your way forward. Coming back to your senses is the result of trying to find your worth. It is time to love the person you have become the way you should have done some time back. Face the world with courage and take one step at a time. Life is a continuous cycle, and we can mess up along the way. That does not mean that we dwell on the toxic things and forget that we have a future ahead of us. We need to detach from some things so that we can have a life that is worth celebrating. There comes a time, and we feel as if we are not going to make it. Do not forget that there is a way out of every mess that you find yourself. Take the lessons that every attachment has taught you so you can have a better tomorrow without dwelling on the past. When you feel as if you have cannot break the connection on your own, it will be good if you look for a professional to help you go through it. You will find it painful, but the pain will not go forever. Stoic Meditation Imagine a clear glass of water. If you were to place a drop of yellow pigment in it, imagine what would happen. That yellow dye would permeate and diffuse through the water. Even if you don’t stir it or shake the glass, as time passed, the dye would diffuse gradually until it occupied the entire space of water. Would it jump out of the water and occupy the air above it? No. Its universe would be the confines of the water, and it would not be able to exit its universe. Extending that same imagery, you can see that the form of that dye—that cloudy appearance of yellow permeating that water—is suspended in a medium. Without that medium, the dye would not manifest in that same way. That die owes its form to the medium that holds it. In the same way, the mind, like that yellow pigment, is predicated on a medium. When you need to access the mind’s higher level functions, you can’t do it in the same way you involve conscious functions. You have to do it by accessing the silent part of your mind—the medium in which the mind floats. The challenge most people have is to focus on that silence. Because the mind is active and its job is to throw up thoughts and concerns, you find that it is constantly making some sort of observation or alerting you to some possible thought. You have to extract yourself from paying attention to it when you need to, and then the mind will start to tune down. Think of your total mind as an echo chamber except in this case it’s perpetual, and you can stop it until you curtail at least one side of the equation. Without going into the workings of the mind too deeply, imagine blasting an echo chamber with a sound. What would happen? The chamber will bounce the sound back at you. What if you put another echo chamber across from it? The sound would echo again. It does this a couple of times and then dies down as the energy in the sound wave diminishes much like the ripple in a bucket that bounces back and forth until the energy of the ripple diminishes. Then it goes back to being calm again. That only works when the original echo chamber is passive. In the case of your mind, it is not passive. Your mind works on the principles of association. If you say one word, it will automatically (and almost magically) respond with another word, and that word will trigger another word, and that will trigger another. So, if you were to play the word association game, you will see that the mind is an endless source of seemingly random thoughts or fragments of thoughts. It is anything but random. The Mind and Intangibility The world is composed of two phenomena. The first is tangible—having, for example, shape, size, and mass. A shoe is an object, just like an apple or a car. These are tangible factors. The second phenomenon is intangible. For instance, whether the car is moving or stationary are intangible qualities. A good way to think about it is to wonder if you can take a picture of it. If you can, it’s tangible. If you have to resort to a video recording of it to show the changes it makes, then that is very likely intangible. In this case, movement and acceleration are all intangible properties. A larva’s metamorphosis into a butterfly is intangible, but the butterfly and the larva are both tangible. With respect to these kinds of tangible and intangible properties, it is the mind that can decipher them, which has to be done through contemplation. The brain creates memories of the result and stores it as part of the neural record. The mind is the only tool in a person’s arsenal that can convert intangible phenomena into tangible representations in the form of neurons. The mind has a stage that is built within it, and on that stage, it places representations of the various experiences and objects it comes in contact with. Without that representation in the mind, the objects that appear in the physical reality will seem unreal to us. On the other hand, if we have something in our mind but it is missing in the real world, we tend to overlook it at times or feel uncomfortable. Take, for instance, your home. You are completely familiar with it, and your mind has every detail of the physical space replicated and represented on this stage that it built in the mind. When you enter this place, the mind is totally at ease with the surroundings because it’s exactly as it should be. The observation the mind receives and the neurological imprint the brain has in store are identical. In fact, if the mind is not aware of an alteration in the physical world, it may even neglect to look at its surroundings carefully and might miss something that may have been moved. Alternatively, think about the first time you went to a certain place. Do you recall the feeling you had in that strange place? It’s a heightened state that will have you alert and observant. The more and more you visit that location after that, the more relaxed you start to feel, and you are no longer as alert or as observant as before. In fact, you may even take things for granted after some time. You could even close your eyes and know exactly where everything is because of that neurological imprint of your environment. The mind is not looking at your physical surroundings and making decisions directly. It is making decisions on that virtual stage built in your mind. That works for both tangible and intangible phenomena. Here is one way you can visualize that. If you’ve played tennis, you would realize that the ball is too fast for the eye to catch and respond. In fact, your mind only anticipates its location based on what it sees your opponent doing and the kind of court you are playing on. It calculates from there and allows you to react. If it gets it right, then it reaffirms the calculation it uses. If it gets it wrong, then it updates the calculations. That’s why the more you practice, the better you become. How does meditation come into this? It comes back to your physical mind. Remember that your memories are made of neurons, and each neuron is connected to other neurons by axons. Each neuron can have numerous connections—dozens, hundreds, or thousands. When you play the word association game, one word will trigger another because they have this connection between their respective neurons. It turns out that these connections are not fixed. They can be altered, and the neurons can be moved around. This is called neuroplasticity, and it specifically refers to the alteration of the layout of the neurons and the ability of the brain to alter what neurons connect to, which, in turn, results in thinking patterns that can be altered. If someone has a poor mind set in that they constantly think of bad outcomes and they associate negatively, then anytime they hear a certain trigger word or phrase or are exposed to almost anything, it will fire up a range of neurons that are destructive in nature. This comes down to a simple issue of just poor associative connections, and they can be altered by reconnecting the neurons through a process called neuroplasticity. Stoics in 300 BC didn’t know anything about scientific neuroplasticity, but they did understand the power of reconditioning the mind to improve the decision making process. That, in turn, improves outcomes. That brings us back to perception, reflection, and contemplation. When you understand reflection and contemplation, you are forced to deal with issues with the same groups of neurons firing whenever you approach a certain issue—just as you may constantly be shouting the word “shoe” each time you play the word association game when someone else shouts “brown.” Somehow in your neurological set the word “brown” is related to a brown shoe, so you respond by saying “shoe” when they say “brown.” You’re not going to always pick “shoe” because on different days the choice of the responses may jump the neurons from one step to the next or down two steps or even ten steps. The universe of possible responses is fixed by what your neurons are connected to. It can be any number of responses, but those responses can only work if they are connected. If you have “cucumber” on a different set of neuron connection, the utterance of “brown” is never going to evoke your mind to respond with “cucumber.” Think of your different neuron sets as a multiverse of possible neuron bunches. It’s easier to think of them in binary terms about whether or not each bunch is connected. In reality, it comes down to how many connections exist in the brain. All bunches are connected with at least one connection. If they are not connected, the probability of getting to that memory drops to exactly zero. If you want the simple explanation, then just think of them in the multiverse. The higher the number of connections emanating from a neuron, the greater the chance that that neuron will be invoked. If you look at an MRI of a brain during its regular activity, you will see flashes of energy around areas of activity. These flashes seem random but are not. They gravitate in waves of associated neurons. When these neurons fire, they trigger the neurons they are connected to, which means that when you have an idea or are subjected to a specific event, you will always have the same associative thought that triggers in its wake. The only way to change that is through cognitive conditioning and neuroplasticity. This is where meditation applies. When you meditate, the neurons are moved around and aligned in a more efficient arrangement. What you find is that one event triggers a different set of thoughts and responses than it did before the relocation of the neuron. The more you meditate, reflect, and contemplate, these neurons arrange themselves in a better formation, and you are destined to have better cognitive outcomes. The Stoics during Zeno’s time did not come close to knowing the neuroplasticity effects of meditation. What they did know was that there were positive effects from it. It altered the way they thought, and when the altered thinking sequence yielded better outcomes, the positive reinforcement solidified the change. Chapter 9 Stoic Meditation magine a clear glass of water. If you were to place a drop of yellow pigment in it, imagine what would happen. That yellow dye would permeate and diffuse through the water. Even if you don’t stir it or shake the glass, as time passed, the dye would diffuse gradually until it occupied the entire space of water. Would it jump out of the water and occupy the air above it? No. Its universe would be the confines of the water, and it would not be able to exit its universe. Extending that same imagery, you can see that the form of that dye—that cloudy appearance of yellow permeating that water—is suspended in a medium. Without that medium, the dye would not manifest in that same way. That die owes its form to the medium that holds it. In the same way, the mind, like that yellow pigment, is predicated on a medium. When you need to access the mind’s higher level functions, you can’t do it in the same way you involve conscious functions. You have to do it by accessing the silent part of your mind—the medium in which the mind floats. The challenge most people have is to focus on that silence. Because the mind is active and its job is to throw up thoughts and concerns, you find that it is constantly making some sort of observation or alerting you to some possible thought. You have to extract yourself from paying attention to it when you need to, and then the mind will start to tune down. Think of your total mind as an echo chamber except in this case it’s perpetual, and you can stop it until you curtail at least one side of the equation. Without going into the workings of the mind too deeply, imagine blasting an echo chamber with a sound. What would happen? The chamber will bounce the sound back at you. What if you put another echo chamber across from it? The sound would echo again. It does this a couple of times and then dies down as the energy in the sound wave diminishes much like the ripple in a bucket that bounces back and forth until the energy of the ripple diminishes. Then it goes back to being calm again. That only works when the original echo chamber is passive. In the case of your mind, it is not passive. Your mind works on the principles of association. If you say one word, it will automatically (and almost magically) respond with another word, and that word will trigger another word, and that will trigger another. So, if you were to play the word association game, you will see that the mind is an endless source of seemingly random thoughts or fragments of thoughts. It is anything but random. The Mind and Intangibility The world is composed of two phenomena. The first is tangible—having, for example, shape, size, and mass. A shoe is an object, just like an apple or a car. These are tangible factors. The second phenomenon is intangible. For instance, whether the car is moving or stationary are intangible qualities. A good way to think about it is to wonder if you can take a picture of it. If you can, it’s tangible. If you have to resort to a video recording of it to show the changes it makes, then that is very likely intangible. In this case, movement and acceleration are all intangible properties. A larva’s metamorphosis into a butterfly is intangible, but the butterfly and the larva are both tangible. With respect to these kinds of tangible and intangible properties, it is the mind that can decipher them, which has to be done through contemplation. The brain creates memories of the result and stores it as part of the neural record. The mind is the only tool in a person’s arsenal that can convert intangible phenomena into tangible representations in the form of neurons. The mind has a stage that is built within it, and on that stage, it places representations of the various experiences and objects it comes in contact with. Without that representation in the mind, the objects that appear in the physical reality will seem unreal to us. On the other hand, if we have something in our mind but it is missing in the real world, we tend to overlook it at times or feel uncomfortable. Take, for instance, your home. You are completely familiar with it, and your mind has every detail of the physical space replicated and represented on this stage that it built in the mind. When you enter this place, the mind is totally at ease with the surroundings because it’s exactly as it should be. The observation the mind receives and the neurological imprint the brain has in store are identical. In fact, if the mind is not aware of an alteration in the physical world, it may even neglect to look at its surroundings carefully and might miss something that may have been moved. Alternatively, think about the first time you went to a certain place. Do you recall the feeling you had in that strange place? It’s a heightened state that will have you alert and observant. The more and more you visit that location after that, the more relaxed you start to feel, and you are no longer as alert or as observant as before. In fact, you may even take things for granted after some time. You could even close your eyes and know exactly where everything is because of that neurological imprint of your environment. The mind is not looking at your physical surroundings and making decisions directly. It is making decisions on that virtual stage built in your mind. That works for both tangible and intangible phenomena. Here is one way you can visualize that. If you’ve played tennis, you would realize that the ball is too fast for the eye to catch and respond. In fact, your mind only anticipates its location based on what it sees your opponent doing and the kind of court you are playing on. It calculates from there and allows you to react. If it gets it right, then it reaffirms the calculation it uses. If it gets it wrong, then it updates the calculations. That’s why the more you practice, the better you become. How does meditation come into this? It comes back to your physical mind. Remember that your memories are made of neurons, and each neuron is connected to other neurons by axons. Each neuron can have numerous connections—dozens, hundreds, or thousands. When you play the word association game, one word will trigger another because they have this connection between their respective neurons. It turns out that these connections are not fixed. They can be altered, and the neurons can be moved around. This is called neuroplasticity, and it specifically refers to the alteration of the layout of the neurons and the ability of the brain to alter what neurons connect to, which, in turn, results in thinking patterns that can be altered. If someone has a poor mind set in that they constantly think of bad outcomes and they associate negatively, then anytime they hear a certain trigger word or phrase or are exposed to almost anything, it will fire up a range of neurons that are destructive in nature. This comes down to a simple issue of just poor associative connections, and they can be altered by reconnecting the neurons through a process called neuroplasticity. Stoics in 300 BC didn’t know anything about scientific neuroplasticity, but they did understand the power of reconditioning the mind to improve the decision making process. That, in turn, improves outcomes. That brings us back to perception, reflection, and contemplation. When you understand reflection and contemplation, you are forced to deal with issues with the same groups of neurons firing whenever you approach a certain issue—just as you may constantly be shouting the word “shoe” each time you play the word association game when someone else shouts “brown.” Somehow in your neurological set the word “brown” is related to a brown shoe, so you respond by saying “shoe” when they say “brown.” You’re not going to always pick “shoe” because on different days the choice of the responses may jump the neurons from one step to the next or down two steps or even ten steps. The universe of possible responses is fixed by what your neurons are connected to. It can be any number of responses, but those responses can only work if they are connected. If you have “cucumber” on a different set of neuron connection, the utterance of “brown” is never going to evoke your mind to respond with “cucumber.” Think of your different neuron sets as a multiverse of possible neuron bunches. It’s easier to think of them in binary terms about whether or not each bunch is connected. In reality, it comes down to how many connections exist in the brain. All bunches are connected with at least one connection. If they are not connected, the probability of getting to that memory drops to exactly zero. If you want the simple explanation, then just think of them in the multiverse. The higher the number of connections emanating from a neuron, the greater the chance that that neuron will be invoked. If you look at an MRI of a brain during its regular activity, you will see flashes of energy around areas of activity. These flashes seem random but are not. They gravitate in waves of associated neurons. When these neurons fire, they trigger the neurons they are connected to, which means that when you have an idea or are subjected to a specific event, you will always have the same associative thought that triggers in its wake. The only way to change that is through cognitive conditioning and neuroplasticity. This is where meditation applies. When you meditate, the neurons are moved around and aligned in a more efficient arrangement. What you find is that one event triggers a different set of thoughts and responses than it did before the relocation of the neuron. The more you meditate, reflect, and contemplate, these neurons arrange themselves in a better formation, and you are destined to have better cognitive outcomes. The Stoics during Zeno’s time did not come close to knowing the neuroplasticity effects of meditation. What they did know was that there were positive effects from it. It altered the way they thought, and when the altered thinking sequence yielded better outcomes, the positive reinforcement solidified the change. Chapter 10 Stoicism and Christianity he role that stoicism has had to play in the development of the Christian ethic is not one to be downplayed easily. Most do not recognize the vast overlapping between the two creeds, it presents itself readily to all those who look for it. These two systems also have great differences in what they teach as well, but above all, the two had one thing in common: they both asked how it is that we should live, and got sometimes divergent and sometimes convergent answers to this question. The birth of stoicism is unique in that it occurs within a period of great chaos throughout the Hellenistic world. This chaos was originally caused by the premature death of Alexander, among other things. During this period of distress, Greek was under attack from within as well as without, and a moral decay coupled with great corruption was chipping slowly away at her internal infrastructure. In keeping all of these detrimental external circumstances in mind, we start to see more clearly why the early Stoics urged so heavily for the betterment of the inner self as a means to finding any semblance of peace in this period of chaos. Virtue under this system was the highest good to which all others were subordinate and this virtue could only be found through knowledge. The wise were therefore the most virtuous, and vice versa, under this system of stoic virtue ethics. The more knowledge we gain through virtue, the more virtuous we become as so on and so forth. Four of the most important tenets of the Christian system are forgiveness, charity, compassion, and love. Similarly to Stoicism, this religion was born into a time period of great chaos and war. The Christian answer to these issues was security and peace, which it sought to gain through diverse means. Their main answer to the issue of chaos was nested within Jesus Christ himself, who was said to be a living embodiment of God. To the Christians, it is only those who accept Jesus Christ as their lord and savior who can be saved. The Christians added another concept to the vernacular of world religion: that of sin. Within stoicism, the closest things to “sin” would most likely be the formulation of an unsound judgment, or the tendency to suffer by trying to influence incorruptible external realities. For the Christians, lots of things constituted sin, more than can be mentioned here, but the only path to the forgiveness of sins comes by faith alone, particularly faith in Jesus. Arguably the most common shibboleth within stoicism as a whole is “logos”. This term refers to the universal force of reason which governs all of the universe’s happenings. In order to gain wisdom and virtue, the Stoics argue, one must follow this force as much as is possible. If we are to look towards one belief as the foundation of stoicism, it would have to be this one. The only Christian parallel to the force of logos would be that body of Christ himself. To Christians, Jesus is perceived as the word of God itself, so to not follow his teachings is akin to not following those of God. We could argue that both of these systems are monotheistic if we allow a rather loose definition of what it means to be monotheistic. The Stoics followed logos above all else and were divided among many great early philosophers in the way of who to follow, while the Christians followed God above all else and followed God above all things. Fear and anxiety are only to be curtailed by following the divine in either system. Whether it be logos or God, these negative emotions will not be managed by any other forces than these ones. It is only with the assurance of a power greater than ourselves that we can do away with the needless worries that we have and accept what we have been born into, still expecting greater things to come. One of the greatest things that both of these creeds offer is autonomy. Both Stoicism and Christianity offer us greater things to subordinate ourselves to, things that are above both ourselves and our peers. In connecting ourselves in personal conduct with these things, we have an opportunity to avoid the pettiness and discontent that invariably comes with following the will of the crowd and to rise above the ridiculousness of what we see in others, not allowing it to affect us in any way or another. This concept of serving something greater than ourselves is exclusively monotheistic in both of these systems though, as many of these thinkers assert that it is impossible to serve more than one God or overarching principle at a time due to the fact that worship of one usually breeds contempt for the other(s). When we serve our personas, we become slaves to outward appearances, but when we serve our Gods within, we escape the slavery of public opinion. Blinded by the lights emitting from our inner spirits, we start to notice less and less of what other people are saying and doing and live our own lives to the fullest. Both of these creeds value simplicity in their worship. This is due to the fact that the need to put on a show about one’s own personal worship is uncanny, and indicates that one is either insecure about his or her own values, or needs external validation in what he or she thinks. To these systems, it is never relevant who is there to witness the worship, all that matters is that the worship takes place and that the lessons learned from higher powers are used to the best of our advantage. The rewards of following logos or God are manifold, but they all exist outside of the realm of what other people’s perceptions happen to be. These two entities are said to reward their followers regardless of what others think or expect. The fact that so and so speaks negatively about us has no effect on what we get of following logos or God. Stoicism’s lack of angels, demons, and the trinity makes it somewhat simpler than Christianity. While the centripetal force in stoic thought revolves around the unknowable conception of logos, that of Christianity revolves around the knowable conception of Christ, an embodied bastion of God’s will. These embodiments of angels, demons, the Trinity, Christ, and the devil are all examples of the Christian proclivity to personify forces beyond ourselves, a tendency not necessarily shared by the Stoics. This ultimately may have made Christianity more appealing to laymen over the centuries, giving simple visualizations of advanced conceptions and heavily peppering them with allegory, making intellectual achievement obtainable for a larger bulk of the population. In contrast with Christianity, the stoic relationship with logos is a cold and impersonal one due to the fact that there are no living embodiments of the conceptualizations but forth. Virtue and knowledge were here administered to gain the goodwill of the universe, which seemed to many too distant and too impersonal to be worthy of following. The Christians, on the other hand, taught of a God that genuinely wanted to be a part of our lives, which meant that we were already part of a relationship with this God whether we knew it or not. In order to properly analyze which of these two systems will benefit us most in the way of better understanding our external reality, we must be honest with ourselves regarding what the universe wants from us. There is a possibility that neither of these forces within these creeds wants or need anything to do with us, and that the universe is in fact just as cold and indifferent to our existence as some empirical evidence suggests. While the Christian system may seem more comforting regarding these matters, neither of these systems are definitely true. What should also be added is the fact that the system that we agree most with speaks volumes about our characters and our worldviews, the two of which should always be analyzed when considering new belief systems. Christians tend to ask God for help. This habit lies in stark contrast to the stoic proclivity to seek help from within. These two practices in time create two radically different practitioners, one having lots of faith in God and the other gaining as much faith in logos as he or she gains in the self. Since stoicism values the self more, Stoics are typically much less susceptible to spiritual manipulation than are Christians, especially amongst younger people. When it is the word of God that we are subordinate to, whenever another speaks on this word, we are more inclined to be influenced by this person. A stoic, on the other hand, only depends on his or herself to follow the divine reason. No one else can teach a stoic how to conduct his or herself in the world, making the stoic much less vulnerable in the face of those who may or may not have the best interests of others in mind. To the Stoics, any good that we come across is only going to come from ourselves. Nothing that anyone else gives us is going to make us happy. It is only ourselves who can give us the happiness that we desire. This puts us in control of our emotional destinies, with no external people or spirits to act either way on our own emotional wellbeing. The Christians, on the other hand, rely on prayer when looking to be absolved of the suffering that they face. This gives them relief in the form of the external parties of Jesus and God, which can feel more supportive than relying merely on one’s self. Stoicism in this way is a system more befitting for an independently minded person, while Christianity takes on more of a collectivist stance, to use modern verbiage. Human nature is another subject debated on within these schools of thought. To the Stoics, we are all born endowed with the gift of reason, and this gift can only be cultivated and fostered through the practice of virtue and the acquisition of knowledge. This is a positive that we are all born into, which does not need to be necessarily changed, only bolstered and strengthened. The Christians taught instead that we are all born with inherent sin, and that we can only be purified by subordination to the will of God and worship of Jesus. Within Christian thought, our moral compass is born corrupted and needs to be refined before we can be considered rational actors. So, as we can see, the main difference between the Stoics and the Christians on the subject of inherent human nature is one of positive vs. negative, that is to say, the Stoics looked at our inherent rationality and the Christians at our inherent sinfulness. When adjusting for these two competing viewpoints, we become very much a mixed entity at birth, which may be the stance most obedient to reality. In the way of bettering ourselves, the Christians place much less emphasis on using rationality to guide our actions. Under the Christian system, our conduct is only made better by the grace of God, whether we apply rational principles or not. The Stoics counter this stance with their incessant emphasis placed on rationality. The concept of an afterlife is another topic on which these two institutions are split. To the Christians, this world was nothing more than a shadow of that one which is yet to come. Visions of the dead rising at the end of days, Christ coming back to separate the sheep from the goats, and God’s kingdom being re established here on the face of the earth all pervade scripture. This viewpoint draws Christian followers into something that is much larger than themselves, and that they play in active role in even after they die. Conversely, most of the ancient Stoics made little to no mention of the afterlife and never spoke on what would happen at the end of times. Here, the focus of stoicism shifts more toward what we are doing in the here and now rather than what will happen after we die. Stoicism and Buddhism Some historians have said that stoicism was derived from Buddhism. Buddhists even came West and taught during the Roman Empire, and the Stoics were the result. I agree that Buddhism and Stoicism have similarities. Both are directed towards achieving and maintaining a mental state that we call equanimity. The word equanimity is perhaps a better word to describe this sense of detachment that the stoics are looking for than the words indifference. The mind state that the Buddhists want to achieve is called nirvana, which is similar to a mind state in stoicism. Because both point to peace of mind, being free of worry and rumination, Buddhist and stoic ways of dealing with external things or disturbers are quite similar. The Stoics use rational thinking to determine what things are up to us and what things are not up to us, and then decide that we shouldn't worry about the things that are not in our control. The Stoics try to transcend what we call a value judgment, saying that we aren't harmed by the situation itself but by our judgments about that situation. An example: someone yells at you or insults you. What aspect of this event hurts you? The insult, or the way you process the insult? According to stoicism, it's the latter, and thus we can choose to feel offended or choose not to feel offended. In other words, we experience someone insulting us, then we judge the event and attribute a value to it. For example, an insult can be experienced as hostile, and we have the urge to punch that person in the face. Then, we make a conscious decision to do it. Instead, you can experience it not as hostile but as someone else’s expression of dissatisfaction, and choose not to let it affect you. You decide that the reaction you could have is not beneficial to you, so you let it go. Buddhists have a similar approach. The Buddha said that we have a choice to receive or reject an insult. One day, when a man angrily insulted the Buddha, he asked the man if you buy something for a person and he doesn't like it or want it, to whom does that gift belong? The man answered typically by saying "I will keep that present myself." To this Buddha said, "Right, this insult belongs to you because I don't want it, then the anger returns to you and you are the one who becomes sad, not me. All you have done is hurt yourself." So, Buddhists as well as stoics are aware that we can choose to be disturbed by something. Both Stoicism and Buddhism are geared towards acceptance and not desiring things to happen, otherwise than they will happen. Buddhists say that everything is impermanent. So, whatever will happen will cease to exist anyway. We don't have problems outside ourselves, it's just what the mind makes of it. We can't control the future, so why worry about it? Stoics have a concept called Amor Fati which is the love of fate, as we have discussed. This means that we should embrace whatever happens. This doesn't mean that we shouldn't strive for anything. We should actually strive for things that are virtuous. But we shouldn't be attached to the outcome. Attaching to the outcome will create worry, and worry is detrimental to our health. The Stoics and Buddhists agree that the best thing we can do is to live in the present moment. When we live in the present moment, we don't ruminate about the past and don't worry about the future. The present moment is all we have. Furthermore, it's the place where the future is made. So, the first similarity in both of these philosophies has to do with the goal. Both in stoicism and in early Buddhism there's a sense that we want to bring ourselves to a state of equanimity under all circumstances. We find that in both traditions. Now of course, in Buddhism there is more to the goal than that, particularly in traditional Buddhism. The second similarity has to do with the method of reaching equanimity. We get ourselves to this position of equanimity through a long process of eliminating harmful greed, desire, hatred, anger, and ignorance. In both traditions, this is the case. Both traditions see greed as a problem, both traditions see anger hatred as a problem, and both traditions see ignorance as the deepest problem. The third similarity has to do with their orientation of the philosophy in that it is practice oriented. It's not just about book learning. In some kinds of philosophies, the whole point of the philosophy is to know certain facts. This is not the case in either stoicism or Buddhism. The point is more about practice than it is about knowledge. Of course, knowledge is critical and crucial. In Buddhism you have right view, and in stoicism you have all kinds of knowledge about the world. But in both cases, what is really important is to use the philosophies as the practice. The fourth similarity is their ethical focus. Both of them see the real point of the philosophy as one of ethics and of finding the best sort of life to live. This was what ethics meant in ancient Greece as well in ancient India. The point is to act in ways that are kind to other people and kind to yourself. That is going to get you the best sort of life. In a broad understanding of what that might mean, this has to do with what we can actually change. We can't change a lot of things, but we can certainly change our own ethical approach to behavior, to speech, and so on. The fifth similarity between ancient Buddhism and stoicism is that they're both pragmatic philosophies. Both of them are philosophical. Some people were involved with creating these systems and elaborating on them. In essence, philosophers were interested in the theoretical aspects, but in neither case was it supposed to be philosophy. This was not simply an idle kind of way of thinking. Instead, it was supposed to be a practical philosophy. A pragmatic philosophy. We did things because they worked. The philosophical system was arrived at because the people arriving at that philosophy believed that it was the most skillful way of approaching reality. Chapter 11 Stoicism and Buddhism ome historians have said that stoicism was derived from Buddhism. Buddhists even came West and taught during the Roman Empire, and the Stoics were the result. I agree that Buddhism and Stoicism have similarities. Both are directed towards achieving and maintaining a mental state that we call equanimity. The word equanimity is perhaps a better word to describe this sense of detachment that the stoics are looking for than the words indifference. The mind state that the Buddhists want to achieve is called nirvana, which is similar to a mind state in stoicism. Because both point to peace of mind, being free of worry and rumination, Buddhist and stoic ways of dealing with external things or disturbers are quite similar. The Stoics use rational thinking to determine what things are up to us and what things are not up to us, and then decide that we shouldn't worry about the things that are not in our control. The Stoics try to transcend what we call a value judgment, saying that we aren't harmed by the situation itself but by our judgments about that situation. An example: someone yells at you or insults you. What aspect of this event hurts you? The insult, or the way you process the insult? According to stoicism, it's the latter, and thus we can choose to feel offended or choose not to feel offended. In other words, we experience someone insulting us, then we judge the event and attribute a value to it. For example, an insult can be experienced as hostile, and we have the urge to punch that person in the face. Then, we make a conscious decision to do it. Instead, you can experience it not as hostile but as someone else’s expression of dissatisfaction, and choose not to let it affect you. You decide that the reaction you could have is not beneficial to you, so you let it go. Buddhists have a similar approach. The Buddha said that we have a choice to receive or reject an insult. One day, when a man angrily insulted the Buddha, he asked the man if you buy something for a person and he doesn't like it or want it, to whom does that gift belong? The man answered typically by saying "I will keep that present myself." To this Buddha said, "Right, this insult belongs to you because I don't want it, then the anger returns to you and you are the one who becomes sad, not me. All you have done is hurt yourself." So, Buddhists as well as stoics are aware that we can choose to be disturbed by something. Both Stoicism and Buddhism are geared towards acceptance and not desiring things to happen, otherwise than they will happen. Buddhists say that everything is impermanent. So, whatever will happen will cease to exist anyway. We don't have problems outside ourselves, it's just what the mind makes of it. We can't control the future, so why worry about it? Stoics have a concept called Amor Fati which is the love of fate, as we have discussed. This means that we should embrace whatever happens. This doesn't mean that we shouldn't strive for anything. We should actually strive for things that are virtuous. But we shouldn't be attached to the outcome. Attaching to the outcome will create worry, and worry is detrimental to our health. The Stoics and Buddhists agree that the best thing we can do is to live in the present moment. When we live in the present moment, we don't ruminate about the past and don't worry about the future. The present moment is all we have. Furthermore, it's the place where the future is made. So, the first similarity in both of these philosophies has to do with the goal. Both in stoicism and in early Buddhism there's a sense that we want to bring ourselves to a state of equanimity under all circumstances. We find that in both traditions. Now of course, in Buddhism there is more to the goal than that, particularly in traditional Buddhism. The second similarity has to do with the method of reaching equanimity. We get ourselves to this position of equanimity through a long process of eliminating harmful greed, desire, hatred, anger, and ignorance. In both traditions, this is the case. Both traditions see greed as a problem, both traditions see anger hatred as a problem, and both traditions see ignorance as the deepest problem. The third similarity has to do with their orientation of the philosophy in that it is practice oriented. It's not just about book learning. In some kinds of philosophies, the whole point of the philosophy is to know certain facts. This is not the case in either stoicism or Buddhism. The point is more about practice than it is about knowledge. Of course, knowledge is critical and crucial. In Buddhism you have right view, and in stoicism you have all kinds of knowledge about the world. But in both cases, what is really important is to use the philosophies as the practice. The fourth similarity is their ethical focus. Both of them see the real point of the philosophy as one of ethics and of finding the best sort of life to live. This was what ethics meant in ancient Greece as well in ancient India. The point is to act in ways that are kind to other people and kind to yourself. That is going to get you the best sort of life. In a broad understanding of what that might mean, this has to do with what we can actually change. We can't change a lot of things, but we can certainly change our own ethical approach to behavior, to speech, and so on. The fifth similarity between ancient Buddhism and stoicism is that they're both pragmatic philosophies. Both of them are philosophical. Some people were involved with creating these systems and elaborating on them. In essence, philosophers were interested in the theoretical aspects, but in neither case was it supposed to be philosophy. This was not simply an idle kind of way of thinking. Instead, it was supposed to be a practical philosophy. A pragmatic philosophy. We did things because they worked. The philosophical system was arrived at because the people arriving at that philosophy believed that it was the most skillful way of approaching reality. Conclusion an we bring the principles of Stoicism into our everyday modern life? Can our 21st century issues and problems truly be addressed by some philosophers who lived so very long ago? Yes, we can. And they can be a huge help in dealing with our modern lifestyle. Stoicism offers concrete solutions to human problems. Not only for the problems of ancient life nor the problems of modern society, rather it addresses the problems of humanity. There are constants that exist throughout the human race, and I speak not of the big ones we all know about, like love and hate and peace and war — a lot of these constants are the incredibly stressful things familiar to each of us. These stressors are problems that continue to trouble generation after generation. Big questions that we never seem to answer satisfactorily. And big issues that trouble our thoughts, and sometimes even our sleep. What are some of these stressors? They are the questions that surround issues such as our relations with our friends and family, the importance of material goods and possessions, the issues surrounding our career and ambitions, and most of all questions surrounding success and ethics. All of these questions would be just as familiar to an Ancient Greek standing on Zeno’s stoa, as they would be to a mid level executive sitting on the commuter train and heading home after a full day of work. Stoicism is not an emotionless philosophy, despite common misconceptions. And love of friends and family is very important to all the ancient Stoic writers. Like today, ancient Stoics asked themselves how to love each other. How to value companions and how to tell true friend from false? They wanted to know how to focus on their own inner life and still be there for their loved ones and children. They also wanted to know how to maintain a calm and tranquil home and family life and believed — as every self help magazine will tell us today — that this type of parenting must begin within oneself. Their children dealt with so many stresses too: disease, war, famine and the uncertainties of the ancient world and Stoics also sought to help their loved ones manage them. Our own children are facing so many negative inputs, from violent video games, and movies to violence in our schools — we as parents struggle to find a way to reach them and teach them about the intangibles that Stoicism upholds — reason, ethics, self control. HOW TO ANALYZE PEOPLE WITH PSYCHOLOGY AND BRAINWASHING: LEARN SPEED READING PEOPLE USING BODY LANGUAGE AND BEHAVIORAL PSYCHOLOGY. MASTER THOUGHT CONTROL AND DETECT COVERT EMOTIONAL MANIPULATION Byrch Mind and Benedict Covert PART I How to Analyze People with Psychology Introduction their words, actions, and body language. Verbal communication is likely to mislead where an individual indicates that he or she is fine when truly the person is feeling upset. The other critical role in analyzing a person is to attain effective parenting. Parents will attest that in most cases, what the child says, and what he or she is feeling may sharply contradict. Any person handling children will conclude that it is important to analyze the kids lest the person sits with a sick child, a depressed child, or a disturbed child thinking that the child is fine. In relationships, analyzing people is important to score their honesty about themselves and another entity. ! lhe primary role of analyzing people is to establish the truth status of In detail, we analyze people to gauge the level of respect they have for themselves and others. In most cases, we need to determine how much a person respects himself or herself as well as others. Relying on verbal communication cues alone will not reveal much about levels of self respect one has, including the respect that the person has for other people. Fortunately, analyzing the body language will reveal convincingly the levels of self respect and respect for others that an individual has. For instance, your dressing and personal grooming may indicate how much you value oneself. On the other hand, your facial expressions and posture will reveal much about how you regard other people, especially during a conversation. Through the analysis of a person, we can predict their spending habits. Another major reason for studying people is to predict their spending manners. For instance, when looking for a partner, it is necessary to profile their likely spending patterns. Through analysis of their body language when luxury items and services are, mentioned, one can predict how the person is likely to spend his or her cash. Additionally, the analysis of body language can indicate any signs of addictions that the person has. For instance, through an analysis of body language, we can get mild hints of substance abuse, alcoholism, shopping addiction, or signs of obsessive compulsive disorder. From this analysis of body language, one can predict the spending habits of a fiancée, kin, or employee with remarkable accuracy. Additionally, the analysis of people helps understand their patience levels. Being patient is a desirable trait, and like most desirable traits, we are likely to force it to manifest to enhance our success chances. For instance, when looking for a date, the target person is expected to push the attributes of being patient when he or she is not. It is only through reading body language that we can make an early prediction of the levels of patience that the person has. The primary role of learning body language is because people tend to rehearse vocal communication, but it is a daunting task to uniformly rehearse tone of voice, the pitch of voice, gestures, postures, and eye contact to ensure consistency. Learning about the patience levels of an individual can help people around the target person relate better with him or her. Again, the analysis of a person can reveal their hobby or how they spend their leisure time. In all social interactions, including workplace interactions, it is vital to determine the leisure preferences of the target person. A manager or supervisor in an organization will be interested in learning the actual leisure preferences of an employee with the understanding that during interviews people belt out answers that will enhance chances of being absorbed by the employer. Through analysis of the body language and incorporating verbal communication, it is possible to determine the leisure preferences of a candidate employee. In relationships, one needs to understand the partner wholesale, including their leisure preferences, to help create a middle ground with your individual leisure preferences. Furthermore, a study of people can indicate their health status. As we will learn, our physiological condition influences the kind of emotions we express and how we express, including our physical behaviors. For instance, if feeling intense pain, then one is likely to frown, sigh, and sit in a non upright position in an attempt to cope or mask the pain. Similarly, if one is feeling dizzy, then he or she is likely to appear sleepy, disconnected, and frail. In healthcare settings, the body language constitutes part of diagnosis where the eye stare and movements of limbs are taken into consideration among other aspects of physical examination. Against this backdrop, analyzing a person can help reveal the underlying health status. Equally important is that the assessment of people can help one determine their confidence levels. The level of confidence one has is important in determining how much the person will feel comfortable. In a team setting, the team leader will need to read the confidence levels of each member to determine how to delegate duties with each person feeling comfortable. If the confidence levels of an individual are low, then the individual is likely to be highly sensitive even to the mildest form of humor. In such a case, it will help to take into consideration the sensitivity of the target person when communicating informally. In personal relationships, it will help to help boost the confidence levels of the target individual while being sensitive when communicating and acting. Another role of analyzing people is to determine their levels of composure. Even though it is akin to patience, but composure is the quality to remain restraint and calm even when a provoking message is being passed. It is one of the most desired quality but hard to manifest in individuals. Being composed does not imply that one mask or hides his/her true feelings, but rather, it is the quality of carefully processing negative emotions without letting emotions overwhelm you. When you comprehend the levels of composure of the target person, then you are likely to understand when to pause the communication or ease tension rather than guiding the target person to an explosion of emotions. Finally, the analysis of people can improve their social experience. Overall, we are likely to analyze people to help us improve our social experience. We are likely to analyze potential friends to help us admit to only those people that best align with our wishes. Without analyzing people, we are likely to admit just any person as a friend and lose them shortly after that may make you think that you are the problem or that you are difficult. Additionally, studying people will help determine their true life status and help you become more sensitive and understanding about their feelings, even their verbal communication speaks the contrary. At the household level, reading the body language of your partner will help you become more understanding and responsive to their needs. Chapter 1. How Can Anyone Read People? ind reading is essentially knowing what other people truly mean, without them saying it out loud, or even despite them stating otherwise. Anyone has the potential ability to analyze others, with the right set of skills and training. It is, however, time consuming and requires focus and patience. An open minded approach cannot be overstated. The reader needs to be completely receptive to the subject’s thoughts and nuances, far removed from any prejudices that they may have about the matter at hand or the environment in which the reading is taking place. Particular attention should be paid to the subject’s eyes, as they are said to be the window to the soul. A person’s general person should be noted too, which includes but is not limited to appearance, overall behavior, physical movements, and, not surprisingly, the gut feeling you have about them. Listening to your intuition can be valuable with such matters. Context There are many reasons to want to read someone’s mind. Empathy is the most common reason because we long for a close connection with other people. Humans are social beings and this need is nature. Most of the basic emotions, sadness, joy, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust are expressed in the same way across all cultures and races. This makes it easy to read said emotions in another person. The subtle nuances are what is much harder to decipher, and it takes a dedicated person to learn how to interpret each person correctly. We all seek ease when it comes to communication with others. Reading someone’s mind can help adjust how we react to any given situation. Relating also makes it possible to respond in a suitable manner. This skill may also aid in lie detection. Being able to look past words to ascertain the truth is a valuable ability. This is most useful in criminology and law enforcement professions, where it is essential to know when and what information a perpetrator may be withholding. For example, a suspect who has an accomplice may not want to give them up. A terrorist with a bomb hidden somewhere may not want to reveal the location of the incendiary device. It is, therefore, necessary to have such analytical skills, which to decipher the information that may not necessarily be spoken. Speed and accuracy are imperative in these instances. The situation or the environment in which a nonverbal cue applies matters. The same thing done in a different setting or as a reaction to various circumstances could mean other things. For example, a cough in a draughty room could be just that, an innocent cough, whereas a cough after an especially awkward comment could be a sign of discomfort. One should always be careful not to pay mind to stereotypes as a mind reader. People and their body language are as diverse as the fish in the sea. One people ‘tell’ may not necessarily be another’s. This is well evidenced by high stakes poker players who take time and resources to research their opponents and figure out what their weakness is, to gain a competitive edge. Considering More Than One Sign Communication is done through multiple distinct channels; there is verbal, non verbal, written, and visual. These are all used differently, according to the message one wants to put across. For example, someone who is angry at someone else may text or write to them in capital letters to express their anger, which would be equated to shouting if the person re actually speaking their thoughts. It is essential to understand the subject’s thought process and how it applies to all these. More often than not, it takes a combination of signs to bring the intended message out clearly. A mind reader needs to learn by constant practice how to correctly interpret a combination of signs in the subject. For example, eyes downcast could mean that someone is ashamed. The same motion while continually looking outside or away from you may mean that they have something to hide, or that they are not interested in the current topic of discussion. Signs are also vital because, for someone who may be living with one kind of challenge or other, they may need more than one way to understand a statement or concept. Likewise, they will also communicate with more than one sense. Examples include people with failing vision, the hearing impaired, and even people within the autism spectrum, especially those who may not necessarily understand typical social cues and need help interpreting them. Not Knowing the Person Reading a person unknown to you can pose a challenge, but it is still possible. Meeting someone for the first time is a whole new experience that registers as a ‘new file’ in the brain and sets the tone for consecutive meetings. Hence the adage “first impressions are very important.” Reading a stranger’s mind may require more patience and more intense focus, so as not to miss out on subtle cues. One should be careful not to make the subject uncomfortable, though, and it is recommended not to stare for too long. An initial fifteen seconds should be enough to get a general understanding of someone without making them uneasy. A short series of basic questions, like name and address, should elicit truthful answers. These inquires can help establish a baseline for that person’s facial expressions, tone of voice, and eye contact when they are telling the truth. Another generally accepted ‘tell’ is the firmness of one’s handshake. A firm handshake may denote confidence, while a weak handshake may denote a non committal attitude. One should also consider other factors that could determine a person’s responses. These include age and cultural background. For example, someone born in the forties or fifties may be more conservative on subjects to do with sexuality or religion than a millennial might be. Also, in some cultures, handshakes are not appropriate, especially between individuals of different genders. Being unaware of such a seemingly trivial matter could lead one to misread a subject who does not want a handshake or who gives only a fleeting one. When reading a stranger, it is best not to make assumptions. Such haste can lead to misunderstandings. Take the time to learn the basics of an individual. A current mood may not be that person’s usual disposition. For example, maybe they had a hard time finding parking and seem flustered, which is just a momentary state. Their real character should be evident once the agitation is over. Biases We should also be particularly careful about applying our own judgments and perceptions to the person whose mind is being read. These are referred to as cognitive biases. On the contrary, we should consciously strive to observe or listen to the other individual objectively and rationally. Understanding these biases helps us to avoid the pitfalls of misunderstanding or wrongly interpreting the other person’s responses or intended meaning. Being objective toward others is also a wise way to conduct oneself, in general. These preconceived notions are the halo effect, the confirmation bias, the actor observer bias, the false consensus effect, and the anchoring bias. The Halo Effect The Halo Effect is also referred to as ‘the physical attractiveness stereotype.’ It is the tendency to let our initial impression of a person influence what we think of them overall. It has the potential to cloud our vision on the person’s other characteristics just because we judged them at first sight. The more physically appealing one is to us, the more favorably we are disposed to them, and vice versa, without taking into consideration the person’s other character traits. For example, a well dressed person on the street would gain more of our attention and possibly admiration than a is shabbily dressed person, yet the well dressed person may be a ruthless grifter who preys on retirees while the shabbily dressed one could be an honest person down on his luck. This is also very much evidenced at job interviews, where one is encouraged to attend well groomed to give a positive first impression. We associate attractiveness with benevolence. The Confirmation Bias The confirmation bias is when people lean towards information that seems to confirm previously held beliefs. It is a polarizing pitfall. People may listen to the same story but only pick from it what confirms their opinions, to the exclusion of all others. For example, a presidential campaign usually has supporters and opponents, and whatever a candidate says or does is sure to be interpreted to suit either side. It will be praised and touted by supporters, while the same action will be vilified and discredited by opponents. We should be careful not to let our own long standing ideals determine what we hear and understand from the person whose mind we are reading. Instead, we should listen logically and rationally to reach an informed conclusion. The Actor Observer Bias The Actor Observer Bias is when we perceive others and attribute their actions to several variables, influenced by whether we are the actor or the observer in a situation. That is, when it comes to our actions, we are more likely to explain ourselves by attributing faults to external influences while blaming other people’s actions to their internal causes. For example, imagine being late to a meeting and saying the traffic was unbearable yet blaming another person who comes in a few minutes passed by saying that they are just lazy. This kind of bias should be far from a mind reader’s modus operandi. Otherwise, the exercise would only be clouded with endless blame games. The False Consensus Effect The False Consensus Effect refers to our tendency to overestimate how much other people agree with our own beliefs, behaviors, attitudes, and values. It stems from the fact that we spend most of our time with the same people, who tend to share our opinions. This leads us to believe that our thoughts are the same as the majority, even outside of our circle. Those who think like us are good and normal, while everything else is not. This is a dangerous attitude for anyone because it can easily foster intolerance. Thinking this way limits our understanding of the subject’s opinion if it differs from our own. For example, a spirited defense of the benefits of eating meat or animal protein may be unacceptable or repulsive to a vegan, who would thereby miss the subtle nuances of how the other is expresses sincerity and conviction. We must remember that the world is full of people from different backgrounds. The Anchoring Bias This bias occurs when we allow ourselves to be overly influenced by the first piece of information that we hear regarding any subject. This is a tricky cognitive device because has a significant bearing on how a conversation or negotiation will proceed. For example, imagine hearing that “there is ebola in Africa.” This is a blanket statement, as Africa is a continent, not a single country, and the disease may be confined to only one country or one region, and the rest of the continent is ebola free. An over cautious European government may issue a travel advisory to Africa, thereby affecting many other countries who are reliant on tourism, Ebola free though, they may be. It also affects serious matters like medicine. A doctor can create an anchoring point, where his first impression on the symptoms a patient may present could lead to them giving a wrong diagnosis. This is the reason for the recommendation of a second or even third opinion, giving the new doctor a complete history of the problem, despite it all being in your medical file. Anyone trying to get to the bottom of a problem should be keen to take in all the information presented, and not be tempted to overlook important data based on the initial utterance. One who can do that will have overcome the anchoring bias. Mirroring Body Language This is a nonverbal and intuitive tool used to form a bond and establish a rapport between two or more persons. It helps to build a connection of mutual trust and understanding. Mirroring applies to all aspects of body language, including posture, gestures, accents, voices, and intonation. The most common forms are smiling and yawning. Smiling when you see someone else smile immediately improves your mood. It is also very common to yawn within thirty seconds of seeing or hearing someone yawn. Even a fake yawn can elicit a real yawn in someone else! To be perceived as being on the same wavelength or vibe as the person whose mind you are reading, it is advisable to mirror their body language. Be careful to copy only the positive gestures. For example, speak at the same tone and pace that they do. Talking too fast may make them feel intimidated or under pressure while going too slow may make you seem disinterested. Similarly, sitting upright is a positive body expression. You should not slouch, even if your subject is slouching. It could come off as lazy or unprofessional. It is also not advised to presume someone’s feelings and use that to inform your behavior, as this can lead to miscommunication. It is a documented fact that assuming a specific body language position that is identifiable with a particular emotional state makes you start to experience the said feeling. For example, steepling your fingers, which is connecting the fingertips of both hands and pressing them together, is a sign of authority and confidence. Doing this during meetings makes you feel more confident about the message you are putting across. Men and women have also been shown in studies to have different ways of mirroring body language, generally. A person interested in reading minds should be aware of this in order to apply it successfully. Women tend to be more astute at picking up and interpreting psychical signals. They are able to flow more easily with a conversation through multiple changes in voice, gestures, and facial expressions. Men, however, prefer to keep a mask like appearance, which makes them harder to read. They do experience the same range of emotions but prefer not to show it on their face or with too much movement. This allows them to feel in control. Therefore, the more effective way to mirror a man is by matching his body language as opposed to trying to imitate his facial expressions. Another important factor to consider when mirroring body language is your relationship with the person you are following. A subordinate mimicking the boss’s dominant body language may be interpreted as arrogance. Matching the movements of someone who is trying to intimidate you, may disarm them and make them more agreeable. All in all, mirroring makes the other person see their own reflection in you, making them instantly comfortable and more receptive and trusting. Chapter 2. Our Bodies and the Way They Talk Positive Bodily Gestures Ow we carry ourselves is important not only during usual conversations but also during interviews, formal discussions, panel meetings, group discussions, etc. It is hard for one to survive in a professional arena without positive body language. Our posture can convey the right information to the recipient or others. Allowing yourself to seem open and willing to learn has an impact on the way others view you. Imagine that you have just completed a job interview, feeling as though you aced every question. When the company picks another candidate, you are left wondering what you did wrong. The answer could be in your posture or gestures. Mastering your message will give you the power to control the way that others perceive you. Below are movements that are generally understood to indicate positive body language: Relaxed or Uncrossed Limbs Relaxed limbs rarely cross one another, except as a position of comfort. They hang loosely. Arms Tense arms are held close to the body and are rigid, but relaxed arms move smoothly or hang loosely. Crossing can indicate tension while folded may just be comfortable. Hands During the conversation, and we are anxious, most of the time we use our hands to hold ourselves or fidget to show tension. Allow yourself to find a natural stillness. Jerky movements are distracting and show your fear. Gestures are not tense nor sudden but are generally open. Legs — Legs may casually be flung out or sit gently on the floor when sitting. They may move to a rhythm while you tap your toes. They may also be crossed, but not wound around each other. When a person is controlling the upper part of the body and arms, legs can convey tension. On top of the table, one may appear relaxed, but the legs may be wrapped and held tense. It can be helpful to consciously relax your extremities before a professional meeting. Open Palms Palm gestures are commonly used in conversations, but do people really understand what they are doing or why? There are three positions one can form: closed fist, palms down, and palms up. Each of these gestures can relay a different attitude. Therefore, it is important to master and use them appropriately. e Palms Down: Palms down shows dominance, it is used to establish authority and superior attitude. It is a way to tell people you are in control, and you are doing the talking. Intensity depends on how forceful the motion is or how inclined your hand is. This can also be a good device to prevent other people from interrupting your speech. You simply raise your hand when someone is about to interrupt, and you ask them to wait, non verbally. Another example is when you raise the hand with your palms towards someone; by doing this, you are asking for patience. This can also mean you are creating a wall between you and the other person. e Palms Up: When someone places their palms up, they tell us that they are honest, trustworthy, and have nothing to hide. Our subconscious has accepted this as a credible way to show sincerity. This explains why people who hide their hands during conversation appear a little suspicious. This can also signal submissiveness. This is a way to gain trust and support by giving up control. For instance, with your palms up, you ask someone to do something, there is a high chance he or she will accept the request, not as an order but as a favor. e Pointing: This gesture can be annoying or useful. When we were growing up, we used it to point at stuff and to learn to count or name objects. As grownups, we also use it as a tool in teaching. However, pointing at people, especially with the thumb, is rude. It is considered as a sign to ridicule or a way to accuse someone. It is best to avoid this gesture unless your goal is a provocation. The Speed of the Speech The speed of your speech is a significant factor in how your audience will perceive the meaning, intent, credibility, impact, and emotional state of your words. If you want to capture the attention of others, you need to find a proper speaking pace to pass along the information. Effective speaking takes these factors into consideration In some situations, you may have to slow down your speech. For example, regional or ethnic accents can create barriers during communication. If you have a strong inflection, people from different areas or countries may struggle to understand what you are saying. Therefore, it is important to slow the haste in your voice to allow them time to process your words. If you are a fast talker, you could be losing your audience. A good pace of speech ranges between 140 160 words per minute. Any rate higher than that can make it difficult for the audience to absorb the material. There may be countries or regions that speak at a faster speed but going slower is preferable. However, speech speed, which is too low, can give a listener an impression that is incompetent, slow in thinking and being uneducated. Although, if you are a foreigner, measured speaking is important since it may be a challenge for the listener when it comes to your pronunciations. There is a comfortable medium that suits most situations. Pupil Size During our conversations, we mostly look at the other person’s face. The signal people send out with their eyes can reveal a lot about their attitudes and emotions. The Pupils react unconsciously to stimuli and, therefore, cannot be manipulated or controlled. Your eyes are the means of seeing what is going inside of you. This is why when people meet for the first time, they make judgments based on what they see. When an individual holds a gaze, he or she is telling you one of these two things. First, they find you interesting or attractive or they are feeling hostility or anger. You can ascertain this by looking at their pupils. In the former case, the pupils are dilated, while in the later have constricted pupils. Pupils will dilate or contract as mood and attitude change from negative to positive and vice versa. When one gets excited, their pupils will get dilated to up to four times the normal size. Conversely, negative moods or anger causes the pupils to contract. There is an easy way to remember this information: when the person wishes to take in more of the world (because they are pleased) the pupils expand. They shrink when the person wants to limit the flow of information. Another example is the eyebrow lift, which is a long distance equivalent of “hello” When they rise briefly, the purpose is to draw attention. Leaning Forward To establish trust and allow others to open up to us, we need to show them that we don’t fear them and that we are not a threat. You do this by showing the willingness to cooperate. Leaning forward is a sign that you are engaged and attentive to the conversation. When people are involved in an interaction, they lean in to signal that they are listening to the information. This is a universal sign that the other party is consciously respecting your words. Use this device when listening to others, to encourage their trust in you. Negative Bodily Gesture If you have studied body language, I am sure you have come across this term before. Negative gestures are body movements that could give a bad impression to others. Even when an individual does not know how to gestures, he or she can still manage to get an inaccurate perception of your movements, because the subconscious will detect them. Here are some of the postures that are related to negative body language gestures: e Leaning Away: Also, can be referred to as leaning out, which signals people that you are not interested in them, what they have to say, or/and their ideas. This movement is important in dating, business, and friends. For example, propping yourself toward conversation when you are on an outing with your partner can show her or him that you wish to gain some intimacy, whereas doing the opposite suggests that you are not paying attention. During a business meeting, when you sit at the edge of your seat and lean in towards a person presenting, this shows that you are keen to gain the information. While with your friends having lunch, when you sit leaning forward as you engage, you portray interest. These gestures all work in reverse to show the opposite. This action is still valid, even when standing. Leaning away can portray that you are closed off to the interaction. Do this when it is your goal to communicate disinterest. Leaning back can also be used as a display of dominance. You can observe a pair of partners, to understand who is in control. Pointing your body toward the conversation can be a signal of submissiveness. e Crossed Limbs: People always either knowingly or unknowingly, read our body language. Crossed limbs have a significant role to play in non verbal communication. Crossed Arms: Crossed arms can be read by others to mean you are insecure, distant, defensive, anxious, or stubborn. Crossed Legs: It shows dominance and confidence when you sit with your legs crossed, ankle over the knee. This is predominantly male body movement, but it is being used increasingly by women. Ankle lock is crossing your legs at the ankle while seated. This can mean that you are uncertain, holding back, or fearful. e Tight Shoulders: Tension can be telling for a person’s state of mind. Anxiety and distaste can cause a constriction of the muscles around the neck. Stiffness is a sign that someone is apprehensive. Shoulders hunched up, usually with arms folded or crossed tight and holding the body, this can be a sign that the person is feeling cold. This can be a sign that the person is extremely uncomfortable. When an individual fears attack (actual or virtual), he or she raises shoulders and lowers the head to protect the neck. Our instincts dictate some of our movements without our knowledge. e Feet Turned Away: People rarely notice the secret messages their feet are sending to others. They have the ability to reflect our feelings. If a window to your soul exists in the eyes, then legs must be the signpost to what you are thinking or feeling. People do not pay much attention to how they position their legs when having a conversation. Therefore, if you are building up your body language, then perhaps it is best you add this positioning to your cluster of cues. Control the message that you share with others while also accurately reading anyone around you. Torso The torso is the trunk of the whole body. It contains all the major organs. The word is derived from the Latin “thyrsus”, which means stalk. This area is also flexible. It can turn, twist, bend forward and backward. This is an area of the body that people have limited control over. Perhaps, that is why we have vital organs there. In simple words, it works without our conscious involvement. Lack of our conscious control makes this a good indicator of our body language signals. When one turns their torso away, it could be an unconscious signal that they want to leave. It could also mean they are feeling threatened and are just trying to protect the vital organs. It could be a signal the don’t like you and don’t like to engage with you any further. In a business setting, people turn their torso for different reasons: they are defensive or feeling insecure, or they are in a hurry. It could also mean they are hiding something, but no matter the reason, when it happens, it’s a sign they are no longer engaged with you and are not entirely comfortable with you. These situations call for acting with care, as not to offend the other party. You can also send signals using individual parts of the body. Here are details of some of the contributions of each of those parts: Neck Body Language The neck is used to rotate and support the head, so it controls some body language. The neck can also relay few signals of its own, including: Hiding Neck is where a predator will aim, either to rip out the windpipe, or penetrate the jugular artery. When people feel an imminent threat, they will react by protecting this sensitive region. Some people can do this by pulling down the chin to protect the throat, and others may raise their shoulders to defend the sides. This is often not a conscious behavior on behalf of the acting party. Turning — The neck can be rotated to enable us to look in many directions. This is useful to extend our range of vision. It can also be used to deliberately send a signal that an individual is removing or giving attention. The neck can also be rotated to exercise it which can signal tension or indicate boredom. Chest Body Language The chest can be used to send non verbal body language signals, including: Thrust Out This movement attracts attention and can be used to display romantic gestures. Women, for example, are aware of the fact that men are aroused when they see breasts. When they push forward their chests, they may be inviting intimacy or just teasing. Men also push their chest forward to display their strength. They do this both for attraction and aggression. In the case of a mate, the man is saying, “I am strong and can protect you,”. In relation to a peer, he is suggesting “I am strong and had better not cross me”. Withdrawn — The chest cavity contains very vital organs and is vulnerable to attack. When pulled back, it indicates the person is attempting to hide or appear inoffensive. This can either protective or a sign that someone is insecure and ill at ease. Leaning — Leaning toward another person can have two meanings. Doing this can show interest in the other person. It can also indicate a more romantic attention. Secondly, it can invade the space of the other person, thus posing as a threat. This is aggressive and often shows in dominant body language. Hips Body Language Hips are at the base of the body trunk. Without any doubt, they do signal certain messages in nonverbal communication. They aid in the movement of the torso when reacting to stimuli. Thrust Out Hips have primary sexual organs and trusting them out is a provocative and suggestive gesture. The same movement may be used to mock and taunt others. Held Back This is the opposite of thrusting them forward, it hides the genitals, to prevent them from being noticed. This can be a defensive position indicating that someone is uneasy. Moving Hips moving from side to side is a common dance move. Any movement that is in tandem with a musical rhythm can show someone to be carefree, fun or sensual. Movement also attracts attention to that part of the body and, hence inviting flirtatious actions. Moving hips back and forth, simulating sexual intercourse and can be considered arousing. Leg Body Language Our legs can tell a lot without us realizing it. This is because people normally focus on the upper body when they want to concentrate on their movements. Legs conflicting with the rest of the body show deliberate control and thus signaling what they are thinking. Open Standing — Standing with feet open about the width of your shoulders is a relaxed pose and normal. A wider stance makes one appear bigger, hence signaling dominance and power. Closed Standing — A person standing with feet put together displays some anxiety. This is related to the previously mentioned desire to take up less space. Crossed Legs — Crossed legs while standing can mean shyness, especially when hands are held behind the back the head is lowered. When sitting this movement can take many forms. For example, an ankle cross while tucking your legs under the seat can show concealed anxiety. Moving — A crossed leg and be moved up and down, and this can indicate impatience. A leg might also swing to music, meaning the person is enjoying the vibe and is relaxed. Walking — A person with a fast walk shows he or she is in a hurry while slowing down indicates that the person has time to kill. However, an unaffected walking speed indicates self consciousness; the person is concerned with how others perceive them. Our bodies display these cues depending on how we are feeling and what we are thinking. People do this either consciously or unconsciously, based upon the setting of the conversation. Looking for these signs can allow us to assess what the person is feeling, even when it contradicts their words. We can also connect with others more effectively by learning how to use our non verbal communication cues to complement our words. Chapter 3. The Basics: n today’s modern world of politics and business, many people now understand that everything has become about appearance and body language over the pure merit of a person. Because of this, the vast majority of high profile politicians now have their own personal body language consultants that help them come across as being honest, caring, and responsible individuals. Since the 1960s, the evolution of our body language has been actively studied, and the public was brought into the world of our body language through a reading titled Body Language, which was published in 1978. Despite this, the majority of individuals believe that speech is our main form of communication today. Well, speech is very important in getting across what we believe into those around us. Evolutionarily speech has only been with the human race for a very short amount of time. Prior to widespread modern language, you could understand what people meant or felt towards you through only their body language. We are still capable of this today, but it becomes a little bit more difficult because of the weight we put on spoken word. With a few simple tips and tricks, you can begin the basics of reading someone’s body language like it is a second language. The first thing that we are going to discuss is you have to understand the context. You have to be able to look at every piece of the puzzle—rather than just the corner piece and trying to understand what the picture is. Hence, while you should be listening to what a person is vocally telling you, it is also vital for you to mentally thinking about what that person's emotional condition at that moment is and then compare it to the physical environment around them. If a person is smiling and if their cheeks are bright red, while the room just so happens to be hot at that very moment, that person might not necessarily be embarrassed. They might simply feel hot. It is interesting to note the connection between a person's gender and their ability to perceive nonverbal communication. There's lots of talk in modern conversations about a “mother’s intuition.” This is not an old wives’ tale. Women have been proven in qualitative scientific studies to be more perceptive at understanding body language than men are. A study done at Harvard University showed that when a random sample of men and women were given the same film with no audio, the women were eighty seven percent more likely to guess what the circumstances of the situation were, whereas men only guessed correctly forty two percent of the time. It is believed that women's perceptiveness of body language is superior to men because, for the first few years of raising a child, a mother has to rely almost entirely on nonverbal communication to understand the child's needs and wants. This is supported by the fact that women with children guessed the situation correctly almost every single time. This is also often used to explain why women tend to be better negotiators than men. Much of basic common body language is the same all over the world despite religion and racial differences. Some examples of this are smiling when you're happy or scowling when you are sad or angry. The nodding of the head is almost completely universally used to indicate an affirmation of sorts. It is believed that this form of affirmation is a genetic predisposition because individuals who were born blind still use this form of body language even though they never learned to use it visually. This then brings me to an interesting point about body language and whether it is a learned action or genetic action. This is a debate that is ongoing and is still being researched even up to this day. Some forms of body language can be traced back to animal ancestry and are believed to be purely genetic. This is the action of sneering at another person in anger or irritation. An animal’s a similar action to this is done when preparing for an attack. There are three basic rules for an accurate reading of somebody's body language. You must keep these three rules in mind when attempting to analyze any person for their body language. Reading Clusters of Gestures Rather Than an Individual You should never try to analyze or interpret a single solitary gesture separately from all of the others. You have to look at the entire picture. This means that you have to look at every action of the person's body and compare it to the rest of them. It is easy to remember this rule when you think of body language as just that: a language. As with any vocally spoken language, body language has its own “words,” “sentences,” and “punctuation.” Attempting to understand somebody's body language through one specific gesture is like attempting to understand an entire paragraph from just a single word. You have to read each individual gesture as its own word and put them together to create sentences so that you can understand the language that someone's body is giving off. A common rule of thumb for this is the idea that someone needs at least three words to be able to create a proper sentence. As for body language, this means that you have to be able to compare at least three gestures that a person is giving off before you can begin to understand their innermost feelings and thoughts. Searching for Consistency This is especially important when trying to decide if somebody may be lying to you or not. Consistency is key in being able to tell if somebody is telling the truth. You have to consider the words that are coming out of their mouth in relation to what their body language is showing you. If an individual's words and body language are in conflict in a given moment, it is often best to ignore what is being said and focus instead on body language exclusively. Inconsistency between body language and vocal words is a strong sign of lying. Context, Context, Context Context is incredibly important when attempting to read a person's body language. You have to take into account an individual's environment, in addition to the signals that their body is giving off. There are lots of body symbols that have no meaning whatsoever when an individual is in certain situations. For instance, a person with arms and legs crossed tightly together on a cold winter's day is not necessarily a sign of feeling defensive—they are most likely just cold. Chapter 4. Verbal vs. Nonverbal Defining Nonverbal Communication onverbal communication is a very vital medium of communication that gives room for sending and receiving messages using any of the human sensory organs without the use of words or utterances. There are several forms of nonverbal communication, and they include body language, facial expressions, posture, and gestures, and so on. The purpose of these cues is to pass across information through movement of some parts of the body which have interpretations to them based on individuality complex. Nonverbal Cues Nonverbal cues are informative behaviors that are not entirely linguistic in nature as far as the content of the message is concerned. And for the visible nonverbal cues, there are head movements, facial expressions, hand and body movements, etc. all these have a direct relationship towards the interpersonal communication and the long term effect it has in bringing people together. While on the other hand, auditory nonverbal cues deal with nonlinguistic sounds as related to pitches and its variations, how loud it is, the speed it takes, and also breathiness. The study of nonverbal behavior has a linkage in some aspects of psychology, which reflects the nature of human, social impact, differences between groups and individuals. However, to understand and fully analyze people, there is a need to draw a line between nonverbal behavior and nonverbal communication because they are two distinct concepts. While nonverbal behavior includes behaviors that ensue without the awareness of the person conveying the message, nonverbal communication also deals with same as they could be used interchangeably. How to Interpret Nonverbal Cues It is, however, possible to interpret nonverbal cues, whether the right way or wrongly, and this gives room for misunderstanding. As you send a message, there may be leakage, which is the unintentional transmission of information through nonverbal channels. As noted, before, nonverbal cues have tendencies to be misinterpreted due to the ambiguous translations attached to them. So, for you to get a clue of what is being said, you’ll need other information before you get the correct interpretation. These cues are mainly to serve the function of conveying emotions, interpersonal attitudes, or any related habits to pass a message across. That is why nonverbal cues serves as a way of giving feedback to what another person said to show how comprehending the message seems. So, with these cues, you can comment, dramatize, or react to any discussion without having to say a word. However, the art of analyzing people comes with the need to understand the coordination of these behaviors. Nonverbal behaviors foster a sort of intimacy between people, thereby helping them maintain relationships in the long run or a desired level of rapport. Another important side to nonverbal behaviors is how you present yourself. How do you present yourself before someone? What was the first impression that spurred from you to the other person? How would you react if you were in the person’s shoes? These and many more questions give way for a_ better comprehension of what the appropriate relationship or communication should be. It further gives you an idea for the kind of expressions that are needed per time or knowing the expressions that best suit someone and the best time to do that. So, you’re expected to understand the emotional situation at hand and how best to react to it in social parlance. This sense of self presentation involves all these and more depending on how important you take human interactions on daily basis. Nonverbal cues, despite its ambiguous attachment of meanings, include blinking, finger movements, a smile, movement of the eyeballs in a particular direction, etc. You should, however, not be tempted to stand on what you perceive to be the meaning of each of these. When you smile, it might mean a sign of disapproval according to some cultures. The rising pitch of your voice shows that you’re under stress, but the meaning might differ to another person. When you fold your arms, it might mean another thing to the person beside you, and that’s how the chain goes on and on. So, what do I do? You just have to take note of your baseline, the initial sign or signal, and the subsequent signals. Though there are generalizations of language and exceptions in them to behold, which doesn’t change the stance of social influences of how people relate. Defining Verbal Communication Communication systems employ the signs and symbols for interaction purposes. As signs are signals used to convey a message, so also is the general philosophy of verbal communication. Getting the whole idea of verbal communication and translating them rightly is a function of the receiver knowing the cause of the action. How do I mean? You get to understand a particular signal because you understand the cause of the action. For example, if your child mutters some words and points directly at the door, what does that mean? It definitely means that probably someone is at the door or an attention is need at the door. On the other hand, symbols are marks or words indicating a complex level of reasoning and understanding between the parties involved. Symbols as complex as they seem brings about the concept of symbolic interactionism theory. Whenever verbal communication takes place, it allows us to look for and understand the symbolic content that gives us the idea of what the speaker is talking about. This process is sub divided into: SEMANTICITY: Semanticity is knowing the relationship between the after effect of an action and what caused it. As you know that signals stand for a particular meaning of its own even though might be construed to mean other complex things. For example, a little child shouting at the top of his voice with a sharp knife in his hand connotes something. So as an observer, what comes to your mind is that he cut himself with the knife and not that his noise stands out rightly for the cut itself. It allows you to see occurrences differently as much as you see it separately to understand the main message it’s passing across. GENERATIVITY: Generativity takes the stand that a finite message could take the shape of infinite meanings. The idea shows the level at which diverse thoughts range from individual to individual. And that’s why languages are capable of combining and recombining symbols and signals to produce meaningful and comprehensible utterances to users of language. DISPLACEMENT: this third pillar supports the idea of communicating what is abstract, and it has a linkage in language. This is due to the fact that language gives room for the communication of things that exists only in the mind. The imaginative tendencies through this displacement factor allow communicating participants to discuss that which only exist in the imagination aside from what can be seen. Chapter 5. Your Mind and the Way You Communicate Encoding and Decoding hen we talk about broadcasting and receiving information from others in verbal and nonverbal ways, we’re really talking about the process of encoding and decoding. When you encode information, you’re generating it. This could be a smile, a sigh, or folding your arms in front of you. When we’re observing the transmission of encoded information, we interpret that information and call it decoding. There are a number of factors that play a part in how we encode and decode information, especially social information. For example, a hand gesture in one part of the world can be positive and friendly, but that same hand gesture can be exactly the opposite in another part of the world. The Limbic System The limbic system is an easy way to refer to and describe several interconnected parts of the brain, all of which play a large part in our emotions and self preservation. Though most of these components of the brain are more or less considered to be a part of the limbic system, it depends on who you ask. Some professionals include five brain components in their interpretation of the limbic system, while others include eight or more components of the brain to make up the limbic system. It’s in the limbic system that you can find triggers for memory, motivation, addiction, and survival. It’s thought to be one of the longest developed parts of a mammalian brain, but still, we know so little about it. Senses, especially the sense of smell, is highly associated with this part of the brain. The limbic system, then, is often referred to as the “feeling and reacting” brain, and this is how we too will think of it. Let’s take a look at some of the most widely accepted components that make up the limbic system. Though these components are interconnected and work together, they are all responsible for different aspects of our responses and emotions. Hypothalamus The hypothalamus is involved in behavioral function, sexual function, endocrine function, and the nervous system. It receives input from the hippocampus by way of the fornix and the amygdala. Some functions that require direct input from environmental stimuli take place in this region of the brain, such as the regulation of body temperature, endocrine functions, appetite, and again, sex. Amygdala The amygdala makes connections with many brain regions. The amygdala is critically involved in managing behavioral responses and responses related to the endocrine and nervous systems. This is where we see responses such as revenge and rage, fear, and anxiety. Hippocampus The hippocampus is an ancient area of the brain. It helps to control corticosteroid production but is also significant in processing and understanding spatial relations within the environment. The hippocampus is also largely responsible for memory functions. It’s the hippocampus that decodes information, stores it, and retrieves it. Limbic Cortex The prefrontal cortex is crucial for judgment, insight, motivation, and mood. It’s also related to the function of reacting in a conditioned way. When an individual suffers Damage to the prefrontal area, there are difficulties with abstract thinking, judgment, moods, and critical thinking skills. The prefrontal cortex is also strongly influenced by the use of alcohol. When an individual suffers a mood disorder or dysfunction, it’s in the prefrontal cortex that abnormality is often found. All of these functions focus around instinct and emotion and therefore make up a significant part of how we respond to stimuli and how we interpret responses to stimuli. If these areas of the brain have experienced trauma or damage, then the chances are more likely that this will become clear by careful attention to the individual’s behaviors and responses. The Conscious, Subconscious, and Unconscious Mind Since you’ll be referring to the subconscious mind moving forward with the art of influence, it will help to refresh what you know about brainwave functionality. As you may be aware, human beings exhibit several brainwave functions on a daily basis. As an individual wake from sleep and begins to perform the moming regimen, the brainwave functionality continues to change. On the way to work and throughout the day, the individual passes through multiple phases of brainwave functionality. The flow from one brainwave function to the other is a natural occurrence that happens to all human beings, all the time. We normally shift from one to the other as if we’re moving through a scale. The scale moves from beta brainwaves to alpha waves, then to theta brainwaves. Beta brainwaves can be thought of in comparison to the critical mind, concentrating, ever assessing, and making decisions based upon stimuli. Alpha brainwaves are closer to that magic spot, the subconscious mind. In this state, you find yourself relaxing. This is probably your brainwave functionality as you’re watching a movie. This is generally a state of calm where the imagination is allowed to unfold. The magic spot is really in the theta brainwaves. You’ve probably been in the theta state at least once in the last 24 hours if you’ve been asleep. If you’ve ever been hypnotized, you’ve experienced the theta state. If you’ve ever found yourself lucid dreaming, you’ve been in the theta state. There is another brainwave functionality so called delta waves. If you've gone too far, you're in delta mode. That’s okay; it’s an excellent result. Delta mode is what’s happening when you experience REM sleep. As someone who wants to ignite your prospect’s imagination, you’re aiming for something between the alpha state and the beta state, but it can definitely depend on the person and the circumstance. For example, you’re definitely not going to be able to lull a sales prospect or a romantic interest into a hypnotic trance in order to influence them on the spot, so you’ll need tactics that are built for the subconscious but interact on a conscious, logical, level. The individual’s protector and decision maker are the conscious mind, the beta brainwave machine. This is the critical thinking, logical, mind that constantly surveys its surroundings and catalog data. This is the mind that is learning and concentrating and keeping us safe and comfortable from the day’s stimuli. Imagine you’re driving down the road to a place you’ve been hundreds of times. It’s almost as if your hands as if your car itself, knows the way automatically. You know the way to go so automatically that your mind begins to wander. You think about what you should have said to that person the other day, or what tasks are waiting for you at home. This is your mind in the alpha brainwave mode, but of course, the beta mind is still focused on safely driving the road it knows. Before long, you look around, and you’re halfway there, and you don’t even remember the first part of the drive. You continue leisurely along in alpha mode, winding the route you know so well you don’t even need to think about it, and in an instant a deer runs out in front of your car. Your beta mind engages immediately, responding to the sudden stimuli and reacting fast enough to slow and swerve and miss the deer; alpha thoughts left swiftly behind. The conscious analytical mind and beta brainwave function are critical for survival, but it’s not the most conducive for making effective suggestions because the analytical mind will latch onto the data to filter and sift and compare against what it knows already. The critical mind could essentially talk you out of any deliberate suggestion before it even gets planted in the subconscious mind where it can begin to take hold. You might tell yourself consciously that you’re going to finally close this big client by the end of the month, but your critical mind will be quick to point out: e The client is probably considering other options e You haven’t closed a deal this big ever e You haven’t closed them yet e The client has a tendency to drag their feet e Even the top salesperson at your company hasn't closed a deal this large As many scenarios as the conscious mind can think of to guard against, it will. In doing so, it kills any hopeful thought before it takes root. Contrary to how it sounds, the conscious mind is not doing this to harm you but to help you. It’s weighing as much information as it can to make sure you’re safe and comfortable. If the conscious mind thinks that a loss of income on this deal is a safety concern, it will do all it can to guard against that, including act like you will not be getting it. Instead of acting upon a healthy seed you could have planted in the subconscious mind, the body acts in accordance with what the critical mind says. The subconscious mind is a state of mind and not necessarily a place in the brain. The subconscious mind is a reference to a frame of mind between conscious, aware thought, and unconsciousness. The imagination "lives" (for lack of a better term) within the subconscious mind. One of the most crucial pieces of being a good influence is understanding a key function of the subconscious mind. It believes what it’s told. The subconscious mind doesn’t know the difference between fantasy and reality; it just believes the story; it’s told and acts in accordance with that story. What this means for you, positive persuader is that if you keep feeding yourself negative stories about losing and staying down, your subconscious mind believes this. It acts in accordance with this belief, finding evidence of this around you and shouting for your attention: “You were right, you’ll never be confident! You were right. These people don’t respect you! You were right. You have no control over this!” What's more, it's not only your subconscious that acts in accordance with these thoughts you continue to repeat. Your body begins to obey these thoughts, as well. Soon, mentally and physically, you’re living the same negative story you’ve been repeating in self talk and out loud to others. But this isn’t bad news. If the mind believes what it’s told, then you can tell it positive and beneficial ideas and stories. Your subconscious mind and your body will begin to respond to and act in accordance with those ideas instead. To illustrate more clearly, think of a movie you’ve watched that has such a sad or touching moment that you actually end up crying or feeling emotional. Your logical, conscious mind knows it’s only a movie or a story. This is why you don’t actually run and hide during the scary scenes. This is why you don’t actually call 911 for help when a character gets hurt. It’s your logical mind that determines the experience is just a story and not a real circumstance for you to manage. The subconscious mind is different. It does not distinguish between the movie and the real life circumstance. The subconscious mind only cares about the story and the emotions and characters involved. So, when you come to the part of the story that brings you to tears, this is the work of the subconscious mind. The subconscious mind believes the story that is being told and starts to produce emotions and feelings to accompany the story. Though the subconscious mind believes the stories you tell it, especially in the alpha or theta states, you cannot easily go against someone’s core belief structure, or it will be disruptive and cause the critical mind to re engage. This would pull a person from an alpha theta state into a beta state pretty quickly. Your subconscious mind is an imaginary genius. It becomes so engaged in the emotion and the story that it prompts your body to respond to these emotions physiologically. The body literally begins to cry because the subconscious mind is experiencing sadness, despite the sadness not being real. Using the subconscious mind is a critical skill for the skilled reader of others and the influence of interactions. The unconscious mind is a bit of a mystery to psychology, but as we continue to explore, we find the unconscious mind to be wider and deeper than we could have expected. Comprehensive studies have been conducted, and evidence gathered to suggest the unconscious mind is where we store instincts and automatic reactions, as well as hidden phobias and desires. It’s also suggested that the unconscious mind is where we hold repressed feelings and psychological complexes. It is in the unconscious mind where subliminal perception takes place. The concept of the unconscious mind has become a part of our language and culture through the famous works of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud, and Carl Jung. Jung, and especially Freud, would frequently tap into the unconscious minds of patients by analyzing dreams and forgotten memories. You’re likely familiar with “the Freudian slip,” which is another revealing act of the unconscious. A Freudian slip is a slip of the tongue that reveals, unconsciously, your true feelings about a subject. This usually comes out as a word you didn’t mean to say, instead of the word you tried to say. The unconscious mind is also the resting place for trillions of bits of information collected throughout a lifetime and organized into a pattern. To organize patterns, the mind groups information into stories. It’s suggested that by putting information into the form of a story, complete with emotion, the brain is able to process and store a higher concentration of information. Humans have an inherent need to organize information in story form, consciously, and unconsciously. If we know the mind in all of its forms is strong with organizing a story format, then we, as influencers and persuaders, can use this information. When you want to get the point across, try telling it as a story and see if this is a more effective method for getting at your audience with emotion. The subconscious mind willingly follows the storyline and believes what it’s told, so be sure to plan deliberately, what your message will convey. Chapter 6. Intricacies of the Face The Head: n human anatomy, this part of the body consists of a skull and other attached outer bone and cartilage components (including a lower jaw). The head is connected to the spinal column by a cervical vertebra, atlas, and attached to the body muscles, blood vessels, and nerves that establish the neck. This area of the body serves to protect the brain. The term “head” can also be used to explain the anterior of animals and not only humans. It weighs 5 to 11 pounds (2.3 to 5.0kg). The face sits on the front and consists of the eyes, nose, and mouth. The mouth has a fleshy border to the oral void. Ears are present on either side of the skull. Blood supply to the head is accomplished through internal and external carotid arteries. “Internal” refers to the inside of the skull, while “external” is on the outside. Areas in the scalp receive blood from the vertebral arteries that go up through the cervical vertebrae. Twelve pairs of cranial nerves provide mainstream nervous control to the head. Face sensation is given via branches of the trigeminal nerve. The cutaneous innervation of the head is like this: e Maxillary nerve e Cervical plexus e Ophthalmic nerve e Dorsal Rami of Cervical Nerves e Mandibular Nerve The head consists of two eyes, two ears, one nose, and tongue inside the mouth. The skull houses the brain. All of these previously mentioned organs are the processing center for the human body. Data is collected through the various orifices and then interpreted in the brain. Humans are capable of processing data so quickly, with the help of the central nerve cluster. The Face The human face is considered to be a distinctive feature that helps in the identification of others. We have short and retracted faces underneath a huge braincase. We will resemble those to whom we are related, but every visage is different. The facial skeleton is formed by fourteen solo bones that consist of respiratory, digestive, olfactory, and visual systems. A vital understanding of the evolution of the human face in the hominin clade in the past 6 million years can be gained through the study of ancient bones. As more fossils are being unearthed and many more hominin species are discovered, there are still doubts about how the current human face came about. By looking at the re created faces of our ancestors, we can begin to understand their connection to us. Ancient civilizations survived through the same social interaction that we are learning about today. They lived their own lives in pursuit of happiness and partnership. Human communication has changed dramatically throughout the eras, yet we are the same at our core. Our civilization is still full of drama and intrigue. We are still fighting for the things that matter to us. Our faces are now, as they were then, a window to deeply complex creatures. What is in a visage? We memorize the look of those we interact with, so that we are able to recognize them. We use our own to show others when we are elated and when we are repulsed. These emotions radiate from us like a ripple through a disturbed lake. Standard Facial Signals for Different Emotions Reading the facial features of another can allow us access to their innermost thoughts. Learning this skill will be incredibly helpful in both a profession and a personal context. It is imperative to remember that, while you may know what someone else is feeling, you don’t necessarily understand why. You could interpret someone’s movements as being closed off without knowing anything else about them. They could have had an awful day. This individual could have received terrible news just before your interaction. Learning about these displays can give you a massive insight into your own interactions. You can watch others react to your professional pitches, in real time. Being cognizant of the impact that you have upon others, can allow you to ace tough situations. We will be learning about deciphering the emotions of others. a. Universal emotions Research says that there are worldwide facial expressions that bound across cultural borders. Even blind people will use similar facials to show their interpretation of emotions such as: Surprise e ourprise e Disgust e Anger e Eear e Contempt e Sadness e Happiness By practicing these various expressions that coincide with their respective emotions, you can be in a better position to read them from other people. b. Micro expressions Not all the feelings stick around for an extended period of time. Emotions that seem to blink in and then immediately out of existence are referred to as micro expressions. These can be instinctual blimps on your radar. The subconscious will interpret threatening behavior in others, even when you would rather not know. c. Eyebrows Others can’t help but react to stimuli using their eyebrows; they may be raised and arched to show surprise or lowered and knit together to show anger. The inner corners of the eyes may be drawn up to express sadness. d. Eyes The eyes will be able to tell you even more about an individual than the brows. When they are wide open, they will be expressing surprise. If you are staring intensely, then you are angry and when you have crow feet crinkles, then you are happy. Many people show fear or romantic feelings by blinking, and when they blink rapidly, it’s an extension of being dishonest or being stressed. e. Mouth This is another essential instrument in the quest to understand the thoughts and feelings of others. When the jaw has dropped open, a person is reacting with surprise. Fear is displayed through an open mouthed gasp. When one side of the mouth is raised that's a sign of hatred. The corners of the mouth will turn up to indicate happiness and down to show the opposite. Anxiety will manifest through lip and cheek biting. People often purse their lips to show distaste. Covering the mouth can show that you are keeping a secret. Common Facial Signals for Different Emotions: Common signs of Anxiety If a person is anxious, their eyes may dampen. They likely won’t cry, but they may have a glisten to them. Their eyebrows will likely be tightly knit, and their lower lip may tremble. You might notice a slightly wrinkled chin, as well as a tight mouth. Their face will likely be pointed downward as they try to avoid looking at what is making them anxious, or anyone else noticing how they’re feeling. Common signs of Fear Someone who is afraid will have their eyes wide and they will be pointing downward. Their mouth will likely be opened, or they will be slightly frowning. Their eyebrows will be raised, and their chin will be pulled in. You will also notice the color from their face disappears as they look pale, and their head will likely be pointing down. Common signs of Anger If a person is angry, their eyes will widen. They will be staring at the subject of their anger, likely with their eyebrows pressed together toward the middle of their face. Their forehead will be wrinkled, and you may even see their nostrils flaring if they are angry enough. Their mouth will be tightly pursed, or it may be open with tight lips as they show their clenched teeth. Usually, their chin will be jut forward, and their face will start showing some red color. Common signs of Happiness Someone who is happy, or content will be smiling. They may have a wide open smile, or a small and subtler smile depending on how happy they are in the moment. They are likely laughing, or they are easier to make laugh than people experiencing other emotions. They will get crow’s feet on the sides of their eyes, as this is proof, they are genuinely smiling. Their eyes may look like they have a sparkle to them, and their eyebrows will be subtly raised. Their head is even and looking forward. Common signs of Sadness People who are sad have a tendency to avoid eye contact. For this reason, they are often looking down. They may be crying, or their eyes may simply be tearful as if they are about to cry. Their lips will likely be pinched as they are trying to hold in the emotion, and their head will likely be down or turned away from the people around them. Common signs of Desire When someone is experiencing the emotion of desire, their eyes widen, and their pupils dilate. Their eyebrows are typically raised slightly, showing that they are interested in the person in front of them. Their lips will likely part slightly, or they may be puckered. They may even be smiling, depending on what is happening in the moment. Their head is usually tilted forward as though they are trying to get closer to that which they are feeling desirable for. Common signs of Interest When someone is feeling interested in someone or something, they tend to have a very consistent gaze ahead of them. Their eyes may even squint as they show full attention to the subject of their interest. Their eyebrows will likely be subtly raised, further opening their expression. You may also notice they have their lips pressed together, and their head is pushed forward as they try and get closer to the subject of their interest. Common signs of Boredom People who are bored tend to look away with an expressionless face. They may appear as though they are not looking at anything in particular, and yet they are looking intently. This is because they are deep in thought, trying to remove themselves from the situation that is boring them. They may have a slight frown on their face. If they are especially bored, they may have their head resting on something such as their hand. Common signs of Surprise People who are surprised tend to have a very open expression. Their lips may be slightly parted, their eyebrows are raised, and their eyes are wide. Their head may even be tilted to the side or backward. Common signs of Disgust People who are feeling disgusted often have their head turned away from what is causing their emotions to boil. They likely have flaring nostrils and their nose twisted up, with a tightly closed mouth. They may even push their tongue up against the back of their lips. Their chin is usually jutting forward. Common signs of Pity When someone is feeling pity for someone else, they tend to have a very soft and sad look. Their eyes are typically soft and focused, and they may be damp. Their eyebrows might pull together slightly in the middle, and their head will likely be turned to one side. Chapter 7. Truth and Relationships Lying eing able to tell if somebody is lying to another person is a very important and powerful skill. Within a relationship lying, is unfortunately very common and very often seen in modern day society. Being able to tell when an individual is lying may save you from painful and possibly emotionally damaging relationships. It is easier to detect if someone is lying when you are outside of the relationship, but you can also use these tactics when you are inside it as well. The following are a few signs that a person is lying to their significant other: A common scientific sign that somebody’s lying is seen within the nose. Specific tissues within the nose are known to get engorged or to swell up when an individual is lying. Because of the swelling, a person’s cells within their nose tend to release histamine, which will make the nose feel itchy. Because of this, an individual may be seen scratching or touching their nose. This indicator is not a tell all be all of somebody lying. You need to take the sign in contact with many other symbols of lying. Another big sign that somebody is lying is a tendency to cover or block their mouth or to cover or rub their eyes. This is often done subconsciously, in hopes that a person would not be able to see those parts of their face and that they wouldn’t be able to tell that they are lying. They may also turn their head or body away when making crucial statements that, if seen past, will definitively suggest that they are lying. An individual may be known to overbearingly refer to certain religious phrases in order to make their lie sound more plausible. These are phrases such as: “I swear on my mother's grave” or “God, no.” By adding religion or the afterlife into a Statement, a person increases the weight of that statement and, as such, makes the other individual think that they are sincere. Phrases of denial such as “trust me,” “honestly,” “and to be perfectly honest” are attempts at being evasive and trying to avoid the original subject matter. If a person is attempting to change the perception of others about their actions, they may use these different evasive techniques. If these phrases are being repeated in excess and are popping up over and over, they may be clues that a person is lying. Individual appearing to be overly defensive or to overreact at certain situations that seem completely random to you may be a sign that they are lying. An example of this would be if an individual you're in a romantic relationship with gets off the phone—and when you ask who they were talking to, they’d respond with some type of hostile statement such as “Why are you so nosey?” A response such as this is completely uncalled for and indicates that a person is feeling guilty about a certain situation. For this instance, this individual is also appearing to try to place their feelings of guilt and mistrust onto the other person. This is an instant sign that a person is lying to you. If an individual has a well known and long winded history of lying, then they are more likely to be lying to you. People often continue to do what they know well, and if a person knows how to live very well, it is very likely that they will lie to you. If a person makes an exaggerated or extreme amount of eye contact, they may be lying to you. The common misconception is that people will avoid eye contact upon being embarrassed or ashamed. Because so many people know about this fact, people who are trying to keep something from you will actually do the opposite. They will go out of their way and try to make eye contact with you under any means necessary. This is an attempt to make themselves appear sincerer than they actually are. It is important to cautiously approach an individual who normally doesn’t give much eye contact and then suddenly does a lot now. A person will often touch their face when they are lying. This is an attempt to put something in between them and the person they're lying to. This subconsciously makes it easier to lie to a person because they feel as though they are not directly doing it. An individual trying to make a lie seem very believable and sincere may give a fake smile to a person. A way of being able to tell if somebody is lying through a fake smile is by looking for a smile that happens around the mouth but does not meet the eyes. This means that their cheeks or eyes may be without wrinkles or maybe particularly relax. This is a sign they are trying to force something. If an individual’s pupils are dilating while they are speaking, this is a sign that they are feeling a very strong emotion. If combined with other telltale signs of lying, this may be a sign that an individual is lying to you. You have to be careful with this sort of signal because pupils may dilate for a number of different reasons. Typically, eyes will dilate for any sort of strong or overwhelming emotion. Because of this, an overwhelming feeling of shame or embarrassment will make a person's eyes dilate. As said, if combined with other signs of lying, this may, indeed, be an indicator that a person is lying. If not, this may simply be an indication that a person feels very strongly about you. Saying the word “honestly” too often in a conversation can be an indicator that somebody is lying. By saying the word “honest” over and over again, a person is subconsciously trying to convince you that they are honest. Because of how hard they are trying to do this; they may overcompensate and say it too many times to be believable. If you would like to be able to detect a liar very quickly, a good place to start is by asking very neutral questions. By asking a basic or non threatening question, you will be able to observe a baseline response for the person telling the truth carefully. Asking them about things like the weather, their plans, or anything that would elicit a comfortable, easy response will give you a baseline understanding of what their body language is when they're telling the truth. You should continue this until you find a series of patterns that match their continuous truth telling tendencies. The following step in trying to detect a liar very quickly is to move into emotionally charged questions. During this time, you should observe the presence or absence of changes in body language, facial expressions, eye movements, and even the way that they formulate their sentences. If any of this is inconsistent with the information that you gathered, by asking merely the easy questions, you may be looking at a liar. When trying to indicate or evaluate a liar, it is important to listen very closely to the tone, cadence, and even the sentence structures of the person speaking to you. A person who is lying may slightly change the tone or speed of their speech. They will do this subconsciously. A person trying to speak more quickly when lying will be doing so to try and get the lies out of them and get it over with as quickly as possible. A person speaking in a slower tone may be doing so because they are trying to think about what they're going to say and are overly conscious about the movements of their body. A person that is lying will often start to remove themselves from their tale when answering your questions. They will try to direct the focus on to the people around them. You will begin to hear fewer I’s and me’s as they try to distance themselves from the lie that they are telling subconsciously. Ways to Analyze the Truthfulness of a Relationship It is very difficult to analyze a relationship when you are in one. This segment will cover both the man and the woman. You will learn how to tell and analyze if there are inconsistencies within their relationship such as infertility and cheating. We will begin with a few questions that are crucial to making this analysis possible. 1. Is there trust? Trust is a crucial part of every relationship. In order to properly analyze your relationship, you have to know whether or not there is trust within it. How to tell if there's trust in a relationship is by examining it and seeing if the individuals within are able to be apart from one another easily and comfortably without any worries. They may miss each other but not to the point that they are constantly asking each other what they are doing. They do not feel happier when they're away from their partner, but they also do not feel insecure for the same reason. Insecurities are key here. A person that is ina loving and healthy relationship will not feel insecure simply because of their significant other is not with them. If a person feels insecure every single time that they are away from their partner, this may be a sign that they do not trust that individual to make good decisions on their own. 2. Are they on the same page? Obviously, in good relationships, you do not always have to agree. However, it is important to have similar goals and similar views of the future. If a pair of individuals have very different ideas of their future and very different views for their lives, it may cause problems within a relationship down the road. It is very difficult to continue a long term relationship with somebody who wants a very different future from another person. 3. Do they have respect for one another? Respect is very important in a relationship. Respect can be defined as being fond of the essence of a person without wanting to change them. An individual who respects their partner will be willing to put aside any kind of issues that a person has or any little quirks or flaws that are a part of their personality. In fact, it is best in a relationship when a person finds these flaws or quirks to be beautiful. However, if an individual puts down their significant other because of their flaws are quirks, this is a sign that they are not truly in love with them. . Can they speak openly with one another? Good, positive communication is an absolute must have for a good relationship. If a couple that is together cannot have good communication with each other, it is very likely that they will not last very long. Good communication is when two individuals are able to speak about anything and everything that is on their minds, and they will not be shut down or told to stop speaking. The other person will listen intently and will give their side as well. There should be no boundaries on what these two can speak about with each other. . Are they equals? Equality is very important in modern day relationships. Putting the same amount of work into a relationship is very important. If the work within the relationship is equally distributed amongst the two people, then they will have a much happier relationship. However, if one person is carrying the relationship or if the other person is leaning very heavily on the former’s actions, they will begin to feel bogged down and will eventually feel as though their significant other is more of a chore than a relationship. Never should a person in a relationship feel as though they have to do something for their partner just because their partner wants them to. However, they should want to do something nice for their partner because they love them. If they begin to feel resentful for the things that they do for their partner, that might be a sign that they should end the relationship soon. . Do they enjoy being together? This one is fairly simple and obvious to understand. People in a relationship together should be able to enjoy and appreciate the simple things. You should want to be around your partner—it should feel somewhat “empty” if your partner is away from you, and it should feel happy just because you are around them. 7. Are they comfortable being themselves? This one is very important in a relationship. If a person is uncomfortable in their own relationship, then it is not likely to last very long. A person should not mind showing their weaknesses to their partner. Their partner should also be very supportive of that person's weaknesses and vice versa. Another way to tell that there is comfort in a relationship is that if things are not going right for a certain person, they should go to their partner for comforting. If an individual is feeling anxious or self conscious around their significant other, then it might be a sign to end the relationship soon. Individuals in a very good relationship with one another and are very comfortable with each other’s company will usually understand their partner without having to speak a word. 8. Do they bring out the best in each other? Individuals that are in a good relationship with each another should be able to complement their partner very well. Being with another person should make you strive to be a better person and should not make you feel bogged down as though you are being pulled in a worse direction by being with them. By beginning with these questions, you should be able to analyze a relationship from the outside carefully. Keep in mind that those that are in a relationship will know the background of their connection the best. Hence, begin with these questions when trying to analyze another relationship, but always take into account the understanding of those within it. How to Tell If Love Is Truly There Using the analysis questions, we can begin to figure out and understand if love is truly present in a relationship. This is obviously very important for long lasting and comfortable relationships. If love is not actually present and if the individuals in the relationship are mistaking lust for love, there can be serious problems. With this being said, love is sometimes difficult to understand and to pinpoint. That's why we will go through some easy ways to tell if there really is love present in a relationship. 1. When the individuals within a relationship want to spend time with each other and want to spend the majority of their day spending quality time with the other person, this is probably an indicator of true love. This desire and need to spend time with each other are a sign of successful long term intimacy. If the individuals in question truly care about each other, they will make time to spend with one another in between all of their daily commitments. 2. Individuals that are truly in love with one another in a relationship will ask about the other person's day. This may seem like a very simplistic and easy way to tell if there is true love in a relationship—and it is. This is because by asking about a person's day, you are showing interest in that person's life. This is a very important sign of love. If an individual does not care enough to ask a person about their day, then they do not care about the inner workings of that person's life and are not truly in love with them. 3. Trust is very important in good and strong relationship partners who truly and deeply care about each other and will give the other person in their relationship the benefit of the doubt. Research has shown in the past that the majority of successful and long term relationships have one thing in common—that is a deep and powerful trust between the individuals involved. If individuals feel as though the other person in the relationship does not trust them, it will make them not want to trust them in turn. This level of distrust within a relationship will destroy it very quickly. If a person feels as though they’re not being trusted and are being questioned at every turn, they may feel trapped in a relationship and may want to end it very quickly. . Individuals in a relationship in which they care very deeply for and truly love each other will be more than willing to offer help when the other person needs it. Oftentimes, an individual will not have to ask for this help, as the other person will simply offer it up in the first place. This is a very beautiful and strong sign of love. This is because a person who offers help when somebody needs it is clearly paying attention to the needs of that person and wants that individual to be happy and healthy at all times. Because of these wants and needs, that person will offer to help them despite the inconveniences that they put upon themselves. . Individuals in a relationship do not necessarily always have to agree on everything, but they should show respect for the other person’s views. Strong love in a relationship can show itself— and individuals that, while they disagree, will also be respectful and not put down the ideas or beliefs of the other person. Chapter 8. Confidence and How It Is Displayed Displaying Confidence Posture osture is very important in the appearance of confidence. An individual's posture can say a lot about their perceived level of confidence. Confident posture is defined by legs that are lined with the individual’s shoulders and feet approximately four to six inches apart. Weight is typically distributed equally on both legs, and shoulders are pushed back slightly. A straight back is also very typical of someone with extreme confidence. Individuals with this sort of posture are considered assertive and tend to project confidence. This is because an individual with this posture is seen as being able to “stand tall” regardless of their height and are also perceived as being very open to those that are talking to them, as they are unafraid of any attacks or criticism. Hands Hands are very important in trying to appear confident. It is important to remember when trying to display confidence through your hands to keep them calm and still. Rapidly moving one’s hands is a sign of nervousness or anxiety. Eye Contact Having the ability to maintain long and strong eye contact with another is a very good sign that an individual is feeling confident. This is because showing eye contact with another person is a very vulnerable feeling and position. This is because our eyes can show a lot about how we actually feel in a situation. By maintaining good eye contact, we are showing to the other person that we are unafraid of what they may see within our eyes. This is a sign of extreme confidence, as it shows that you are self assured in your feelings and believes that you are unafraid of how a person will interpret what they see in your eyes. Mirroring Body Language Mirroring the body language of those around us elicits a sort of understanding and seeks acceptance from those around us. This raises our confidence level as we humans strive to be liked by those around us. Because those around us will subconsciously begin to like us more by mirroring their body language, they will also be confident because of their positive view of us. Fidgeting It is very important to remember not to fidget when you are trying to display levels of confidence. Fidgeting in any form—no matter what part of your body is doing the movement—shows signs of nervousness and anxiety. In addition to this, it can simply annoy those around us. People are often irritated by constant rhythmic tapping or brushing noises. This is something to keep in mind if you are an individual who likes to bounce their leg or tap their foot at simple moments. Ways to Spot a Lack of Confidence in a Person A very common sign of lack of confidence in an individual is if they are constantly touching their phone while in social situations or while alone. If an individual finds themselves unable to sit still during a social situation in which they don't know very many people, this may be a sign that they lack confidence. Checking their phone is a sign that they feel uncomfortable in a social situation and are unable to connect with those around them. Another sign of a lack of confidence in an individual is a quick backing down during a disagreement to avoid arguing with another person. An individual with an extreme lack of confidence will not want to cause problems with a person that they disagree with. Because of this, they often negotiate their views in order to avoid conflict. This shows that a person lacks confidence because they are not assured in their own opinions and would rather back down than express themselves honestly. Another common sign of a lack of confidence in an individual is their inability to leave their homes without any sort of makeup or hairstyling. This is a very obvious sign of a lack of confidence because it shows that an individual doesn't feel that they are worth being looked at unless they have something on their bodies or face to make them look more beautiful. Putting makeup on or doing their hair gives a false sense of self esteem to an individual, which people with low self esteem or confidence rely on very heavily? An individual with low confidence will also tend to take constructive criticism far too personally. If a person gives this individual constructive criticism about something, they will take it way too seriously and will end up feeling very strong negative emotions. This is a huge sign of low confidence and low self esteem because this individual is not emotionally balanced enough to handle constructive criticism from those around them. Individuals who have low confidence or self esteem will also find themselves afraid to contribute their opinion in a conversation. They will often second guess themselves before they say anything instead of diving into an interesting conversation. They may find themselves stuttering or putting themselves down. This is because these individuals don't know how well their opinions will be received and are afraid of other people taking their opinions negatively. This is a sign of low confidence or self esteem because these individuals care very deeply about how the people, they make contact with view them. Individuals who have difficulty with confidence also find themselves extremely indecisive with very simple and basic decisions. They may change their minds very often after coming to a decision. This is a sign of low self confidence because this individual cannot trust their own opinions or decisions. This is especially a sign of low self confidence when this applies to very simple tasks or simple decisions. Individuals with low self confidence will also have extreme difficulty handling genuine compliments from those around them. They tend not to think that they are worthy of such good compliment, and they usually put them down or not accept them. Individuals struggling with low self confidence will also tend to give up very soon with things that they are trying to do or achieve. They may have goals and dreams that they want to accomplish but will give up before they even really begin. This is a sign of low self confidence because they do not believe that they have the ability to accomplish these goals and dreams before they even start. Individuals that struggle with low self confidence will also tend to compare themselves with those around them. They tend to have very strong attention to the people that are doing better than them and will point out all of the ways that they are not doing as well as those around them. This is a strong sign of low self confidence because it says that the person in question does not view themselves as very successful or doing very well in their life. Slouching is a very common display of low self confidence in an individual. Why so? It is because lowering the center of a person's body is a sign that a person is not willing to hold up the weight of their upper body themselves. It sends off a signal that that individual is not proud of himself/herself. Because of these things, this is a big sign of low self confidence. In order to detect low self confidence in an individual, all you have to do is look out for some of these common signs of low self esteem and self confidence. You can also detect low self confidence or low self esteem within yourself by looking out for these common signs. If you find that you or someone you know has low self esteem or confidence, you can begin to work on them by saying very positive statements about yourself on a regular basis. Chapter 9. How to Fake Your Body Language: Taking In A Deep Breath hen talking to someone whether you are giving a speech to the audience or you are listening to them, you should watch both the breathing rate and the other persons. The breathing rate of a person tells much about your emotions. Breathing of a person and his emotions are highly connected so you must be very careful with your rate of breathing if you want to fake it. When someone breaths deeply, it might show that he is afraid. A person holding his breath for some time than breathing deeply shows that the person is afraid. For example, a child who knows that after telling his mother that he licked sugar will be beaten, no matter how the mother asks him; he will simply breathe deeply without speaking. He is sending a message to his mother that he is afraid that if he speaks, he will be beaten. So if you are afraid and you do not want to show the other person, you want to feel more superior, you want to prove that you are not afraid of doing anything or you are not afraid of the other person, make sure your breathing rate is balanced. You should not breathe in deeply once after he has asked a question, take time breathing normally, you can hold your breath a little bit then start breathing normally, someone won’t recognize the fear you are experiencing. Taking a deep breath may also signify anger. When someone is angry, he has no control over the thing or the one upsetting him. Just like fear, anger is emotional and like we said emotional feelings are connected to breathing. When you are so upset and so angry, watch your breathing rate if you do not want to show it. To fake your breathing rate, you can smile a bit and sip some water if there is any in the glass instead of breathing deeply. Maintain your eye contact and think of funny things in your past, use humor, like crack a funny joke when the person aiming to make you angry says an awful thing, you can also repeat a calming phrase within your head like ‘take is fine, take it easy’. This will help calm you down and you will realize your breathing rate is normal. Deep breath also shows excitement. This could be excitement from receiving after party. You sit down to think about it, you hold your breath while thinking about it then you breathe in so deeply. You are excited that it was a wonderful party, but if you happened to sneak out of the house and go for this wonderful party and you come back to find your parents waiting for you, you have to fake it because party on a school day is guaranteed with punishment. To fake it you should make sure you do not breathe deep in with a wide smile on your face. Not doing this will make your parents see your excitement and know what you were up to. When someone is relieved, he is likely to take a deep breath. Thus, taking a deep breath signifies relief. You may have been fighting with someone over a piece of land for a year, and then he comes to you and says he has let it go, you can have it. This is a relief. You will take a deep breath for that. You can always fake this so that he can see how tiring the case was to you. When you breathe in deeply, it might also show shock, surprise which is always accompanied by a head sign, love attraction, hopelessness or sadness. If you have to fake all these, you must make sure your breathing stays normal no matter how much these feelings flood your mind. To make sure you want to fake all your emotional traumas or feelings without anyone knowing they are fake; it is also good that you identify your emotional triggers. This will help you be in charge of your emotions and each time any trigger is pressed, you will find yourself smiling about it and it will not affect you. This way you would have faked it beyond any doubt. Controlling the movement of your eyebrows The eyebrow movement will tell what you are thinking and the message you are trying to pass across. By lowering your eyebrows when speaking to someone it will send a variety of messages. When your eyebrows are lowered, it shows deception. You will be concealing something from the audience or the speaker. If you want to fake this even if you are hiding something, make sure your eyebrows are raised humbly. This will send a different message. Lowered eyebrows also show desire. The desire that the eyes cannot see or are afraid to view. A person lowering eyebrows may also be annoyed. Annoyance may be caused by a variety of things and he is afraid that if he raises his eyes he might cry or be tempted to say something bad. If you want to fake it so that nobody can know if you are annoyed, you can start breathing in and then out as you count, or focus on the main aim of the conversation and you will realize that your annoyance is subsiding and while doing all this, let ensure your eyebrows haven’t changed their former position. Raised eyebrows may signify attention request or demand depending on the question posed before the raising. Demanding for attention with raised eyebrows is seen rude sometimes especially if it is coming from a child to a parent or a younger person to an older on so you should be careful if you have this habit. Faking this raising of eyebrows when asking for attention, you may show attraction instead, when someone sees attraction in the eyes, he will give the attention you want. This attraction can be done by raising your eyebrows to expose your eyes. Submission can also be symbolized by raised eyebrows. For example, a person asking you if you are going to lend him money, and you raise tour eyebrows. This means you have submitted to his request and he will get the money. But if you do not want the person to see that you are forcing this submission, you can as well lower your eyebrows, he will be confused and wont tell if it is a yes or no or you can raise your eyebrows with the eyes looking up, this will tell the person that you are thinking about it. Raising one eyebrow can also indicate cynicism especially when the other person is speaking inaccurately. The other person may feel offended if he saw you cynically raising your eyebrows thus to fake it, you can stay with your eyebrows normal but focus your mind on something else. When he is done talking you greet each other and leave like nothing ever happened. Most of the psychologists use this faking especially to the clients who are so depressed and are speaking things that do not make sense, the psychologists even go ahead and nod their heads while the clients are speaking then they can now paraphrase their words to get clarification otherwise raising one eyebrow to them will confuse them more and they will be annoyed that they are not getting the help they needed. Pushing together your eyebrows and pulling up your forehead indicated relief. For example, you have been waiting for a whole day for some news from the interview you attended, then finally the results come, and you have passed. This is a great relief and you will feel your nerves calming down. This way your eyebrows will be pushed together, and forehead pulled up. To make sure that someone believes in this you as it is written. Anxiety can also be seen when the eyebrows are pushed together, and the forehead pulled up. You can fake anxiety especially when you want to get out of a boring meeting that you have by saying you have to see a doctor. The show of anxiety on your face can get you permission to step out. Relaxing your face A relaxed face is not a compressed face. A relaxed face can easily be seen by the facial muscles. The muscles are flexed, the eyebrows not clenched together, the forehead is not wrinkled or creased, the eyes are not tensed, and the lips are full. All these describe a relaxed face. If anything from the above is opposite, this means you do not have a relaxed face, and anyone can be able to tell what is bothering you. To fake a relaxed face, you have to understand the following facial meanings. A relaxed face shows control of emotions. It tells that you are in control of what is going on around you. For example, you indulge in an argument at the office with your co worker, the shouting is so high from your fellow worker that the other workers come in, just by the calmness on your face, and the other workers will see control of your emotions. They will know that you have the situation under control, and it is not bothering you. If you are a businessperson and you want to show people that they can count on you, you must have a relaxed face. Relaxed faces show responsibility. Especially when there is a problem in the office and people are confused, by maintaining a relaxed face, people tend to see you as more responsible and they will be counting on you to provide the solutions to any problems arising. Most magnetic leaders are experts at this. They always maintain calm faces even when the going is so rough because they know people are counting on them. When you are in control of things happening around you it is seen from your calm face. For example, you receive a call from the office that the workers are rioting, the police have been called to disburse then, but the situation is still rampant. S you decide to go to the office, with a calm face you call upon the workers, and they all stop whatever they are doing and start listening to you address their concerns. The calmness on your face will tell anyone that comes to that meeting that you have got control over your face even when deep within you know you are not calm. If you want people to respect you, make sure your face is calm especially during stress. When you are so hurt and stressed up, people will always see it on your face. But when your face seems so calm with no sign of stress, this will pull them towards you, they will respect you and most of them will want to emulate you. They will see a person that is a good example who is in control and can lead. A calm face will also make someone see honesty in you. When you are speaking to someone after a mistake has been committed, your face will let the person know if you are honest or not. For example, in school, when something wrong has happened and the teacher calls you to the staffroom, the calmness of your face will teacher that you are honest in whatever you are saying. So, faking a calm face will make you get anything you want to. The Smile It is important to spend some time focusing on the smile that you give off. Many of us have been trained on how to give a fake smile in any situation, but there is a big difference between the fake smile and a genuine smile. You may be able to fake it with some people, but often, you need to try and get a real and genuine smile on your face to impress those around you. Remember that with a genuine smile, you need to use more than the sides of the mouth. This one includes the whole face and even some crinkles around the eyes. This can be done even when faking it, but you need to do some practice. An excellent way to do this is to spend some time in a mirror, working on the smile, and trying to get the whole face into it. Doing a smile in front of the mirror is going to make a big difference. You can look at how the smile will appear to others and get a general feel of how it is going to feel to do this. Then, when you are in front of someone else using this smile, without the mirror present, you will know how to make this smile appear for you. Speaking In Balanced Tones Tones involve the volume you use and the emphasis you place on every word. When the emphasis is placed on different words, the meanings of words change. When different tones are applied to different words, it changes the emotional influence on the words. For example, someone saying politely while joking ‘you are stupid’ it will sound funny and a joke and emotionally it won’t hurt you unlike someone speaking in a firm tone with serious telling you the same. The emotional attachment to the first incidence and the second incidence differs because of tonal variation. Supporting Your Head How you support your head while talking tells more than you think. When your head is supported at the chin position horizontally with the chin lifted, this is a show of superiority. Most managers like sitting in this position in the meetings while listening to the views of the junior staff. This is an expression that they are superior over the others. Faking this is easy as long as you do not lose your focus. When you clasp your hands at the back of your head with the elbows spread out, this indicates that you are confident enough. You are confident about what you are talking about and at the same time, it signifies superiority and dominance. For example, a person is trying to send the message that ’I know this very wee and I am the boss’. This happens mostly after someone has finished a certain project. Sometimes clasping the hands at the back of your head while facing the opposite side of a person who is demanding something from you may show submission. This is mostly seen when the police are making arrests. The police tell you to put your hands at the back of your head so that they can search for you. When you comply, it shows you have submitted to the command or request of the being issued. When you support your head sideways it sends different messages. You could be tired, and you just need some relaxing especially when you support your head with your eyes closed. It could also mean that you are indeed thought when you support your head with your hands on your forehead looking down. Supporting your head sideways with focus on the speaker and a smile can also indicate admiration. This happens mostly when people are on a love date. Supporting your head by putting the hands on your head may show regret. This mostly is seen when football players have missed a penalty or a goal chance. Your Stance The last thing that we are going to look at is your stance. You need to make sure that you are picking out the right kind of stance to impress another person and let them know that you are interested. Of course, the posture is going to be an important part of all of this. You want to stand upright, rather than to slouch, and you want to make sure that you show off the confidence that is inside of you. There is more to this one than just the posture that you use, though. If you can add a few more things into this, you will find out that it is going to help you to get some results with how comfortable others are around you. The first thing to look at is your feet. If you want the other person to think that you are interested in them and that your whole attention is on them, then make sure the feet are pointed in the right direction. They need to be pointed at the person you are talking to, rather than to the side or even worse, towards the door. The way that you lean is important as well. If your posture has you leaning towards the door, or at all away from the other person, then this is going to give them the thought that you are not interested in them at all. But, if you are leaning slightly towards them, with your body leaning in, it shows that you are interested in what they are saying to them. It is hard to fake the body language that you are doing with another person. While we often wish to show off a certain kind of appearance to others, it is going to be tough to do this. You have to be careful about how you do this. But with some practice and tips shared here, you will become more aware of the different cues that our bodies are giving off to others, and it is a lot easier for you to give off the appearance that you would like. Chapter 10. Detecting Lying and Deception otably, each one of us would like to easily determine deception at any level such as personal, social, and organizational levels but it is not that easy. Some professions that rely wholly on determining the truth in personal and social contexts such as law agencies, health agencies, and media agencies invest heavily in determining the truth value of their productions, but they fairly fail despite having immense resources. However, if we go back, we will realize that human behavior is dynamic, and this implies that what proves a lie in one context may also prove the truth in another context. There is only one reliable way to determine lying and deception, and that is establishing a baseline for the target individual and comparing against this baseline as well as doing the adequate prior investigation before confronting the person. Unfortunately, creating a baseline for each and conducting relevant background study is not always assured due to the time factor and resource constraints and this implies that a speedy analysis of body language and verbal communication can help determine a likelihood of a truth or a lie. Verbal Hints of a Liar Liars Tend to Respond to Questions That Were Not Asked If a person is lying, then he or she wants to cover as much ground as possible, and this includes answering questions that were not posed. By answering questions that were not asked, the individual is prompting the speaker to a particular direction and does not want to be caught off guard. Answering questions that are not asked may also give the individual lying an opportunity to deny the speaker adequate time to analyze the answers given by continuously bombarding the interrogator with new information and ideas. Lastly, answering questions that were not asked also helps the layperson to appear well prepared and knowledgeable in what is being asked. Liars Tend to Answer a Question with a Question Expectedly, most liars will respond to a question with another question to shift the burden of thinking and responding to the interrogator. Most politicians employ this tactic when being interviewed, and it is meant to buy them enough time to recall information to the main question. For most liars, not responding is akin to affirming that they lack memory of what is being asked or what happened. The other purpose of responding to a question with another question is to irritate the interrogator and derail his or her composure. Responding to a question with a question is a defensive tactic indicating attempts to hide something. Most Liars Tend to Make Self corrections to Avoid Sounding Uncertain As indicated, most liars want to ensure that each area is covered to eliminate any doubts because allowing room for doubt may expose them. For this reason, most liars tend to self correct to ensure the information given is irrefutable. In most cases, liars will repeat the correction to ensure that the interrogator and the audience also capture the self correction. As expected, the liar will blame the need to self correct on a slip of the tongue or the fast nature of the interview. Another reason for self correction by a liar is that the individual has a premeditated script and outcome and keeps forcing everything to align with the premeditated picture. Liars Tend to Feign Memory Loss As expected, most liars need a safe escape button when cornered and feigning memory loss is a favorite excuse for most liars. When a liar is cornered, then he or she will cite memory loss and then institute self correction to attain the preformed script. Try watching interviews with politicians to appreciate how they feign memory loss to escape explaining something and pretend to have recalled the information when there is an opportunity to sound believable. Most Liars Tend to Report What They Did Not Do as Opposed to What They Did People that lie will give an account of what they did not do to avoid being held accountable. If a liar dwelled on what he or she did, then the individual can be held accountable, and this is not something that a liar wants. However, if a liar dwells on what they should have done, \ he or she has a large degree of freedom to give any answer and avoid scrutiny. Again, try watching a recorded or filed interview with any politician to appreciate how this technique is employed. Liars Tend to Justify Their Actions Even When Not Necessary Expectedly, most liars are insecure and are uncertain that they sound convincing. For this reason, they over justify everything because they feel that no one believes them even when people have fallen for the lies. When examining a potential liar, look for signs of unnecessary justification, and again, politicians will provide a good case study of over justification. Most Liars Avoid Mentioning Emotional Feelings in Their Version of Events Since a liar is faking everything, he or she will avoid mentioning feelings that were associated with what is being reported. Mentioning emotions may force one to show them. For instance, if you were talking about an exciting event that you witnessed, then your facial expressions and voice should manifest positive emotions, and this is not something a liar wants because he or she is not assured of the consistency of verbal communication and body language. Most Liars Are Careful, and Will Insist on a Question to Be Repeated Finally, liars focus more on what is being asked because they only want to accept a question that they are certain of responding to. Liars dwell more on what the question is and what the interrogator wants to help them generate convincing information. The other role of wanting questions repeated is to help the liar elicit a response by making up one because there is none. Nonverbal Hints of a Liar Liars Randomly Throw Gestures The hand gestures are among the best indicator of positive and negative emotions and are difficult to fake in a consistent manner. If one is angry but is pretending to be calm, he or she will throw gestures randomly. Most liars get irritated when taken to the task of what they just said and are likely to throw random gestures in the air even as they try to sound calm. Against the Norm, Liars Speak Faster than Usual People that normally do not speak fast will suddenly speak fast when they are lying. Speaking fast helps, the person denies the audience adequate time to listen and analyze the information. Speaking fast also allows the liar to exhaust all of the rehearsed information, as any interjection will throw the liar off balance. Speaking fast also indicates that the person is uncomfortable with the audience or the message and wants to finish fast and end the experience. Liars Sweat More Than Usual People sweat, and it is normal. However, more than normal levels of Sweating even when the weather is fine may indicate that one is panicking and feeling cornered. All these may indicate a sign of a liar. Liars Avoid Eye Contact Most liars shun eye contact or give a sustained stare to intimidate the target person. Shunning eye contact indicates that the person feels awkward or embarrassed about what he or she is presenting to the audience. Pacing Up and Down If one paces up and down more than necessary, then the individual is likely lying. All these indicate feeling uncomfortable with the message and the audience. Chapter 11. Speed reading peed reading is a technique to increase reading without compromising understanding and retention of information. There are several different methods of speed reading, but they all aim to read clearly, but faster. For those who work as a freelancer, especially the producers of web content, digital marketing, etc., reading is a prime activity. And speed reading lets you take even more of the time you have available for this activity. It is through reading that you deepen your knowledge to argue more strongly and keep your repertoire of subjects relevant and up to date. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to devote the time needed to complete reading an article. In this situation, speed reading helps you extract the most important information in less time. What Is Speed Reading? Speed reading is a technique that seeks to increase the reading speed without compromising understanding and retention of information. Check out this step by step guide and learn how to enhance your speed reading skills! 1. Train your eyes to make bigger jumps Do you know how the movement of your eyes works while reading? Basically, it's a jumping move. Your eyes pin one point on the line and then jump to the other. The higher this leap, the more proficient is your reading. Beginner readers, like children, skip only one word at a time and therefore take longer to finish each line. Therefore, the first step of speed reading is to train the eye movement so that it is wider. 2. Go straight ahead The second step is to control that anxiety, that sense of obligation to understand 100% of the text. We are going to take this up further but know that 80% understanding is an excellent goal. In other words, you do not have to return to the beginning of the page every time you do not understand a line. After all, re reading can take a long time and that is precisely what we are trying to avoid. In addition, you can fully understand the general idea of a text, even though some excerpts are more confusing. Then, after finishing the text, resume only the parts where you have doubts. But if you stop and go back constantly, you will never finish reading. Another important tip is to not interrupt the reading to check the dictionary. If you are very curious about the meaning of a word, write it down to check afterwards. However, do not abandon the text to browse the dictionary because when you return, it will take you even longer to resume reading. In the meantime, try to understand the term by context you may not absorb the exact meaning of the word, but it will be enough to understand the message the author wanted to convey. 3. Stop speaking the words The third step is to eliminate a negative practice that is a habit of many people: to pronounce the words as they read, either loudly or mentally. This habit prevents the development of speed reading because it means that you will literally read word for word. The speed slows down and as incredible as it may seem, the capacity for understanding as well. Because your brain will be busy with pronunciation, you will not be able to concentrate on interpreting what you are reading. The result is that you will have to reread the same stretch several times. If you are too accustomed to pronouncing as you read, losing this habit can be a difficult and time consuming process. An interesting tip is to put a pencil in your mouth as you read. With a little practice, you will lose this "craze" and see how it improves your reading time. 4. Use skimming technique The fourth step is "skimming." This is a well known technique for Instrumental English, but it is also useful for speed reading in any language. Skimming consists basically of looking quickly through a text in order to extract basic information index, title, author, date of publication, main subject, subtopics developed, graphics and images. This technique is useful for you to quickly evaluate any text and then set whether to devote more time to a full reading. If you are researching on a specific subject, for example, skimming will allow you to identify whether a particular article has relevant information about the subject. In addition, you will find the excerpts that interest you more easily. 5. Use the scanning technique The fifth step, "scanning," is another technique used in English Instrumental. It consists basically of looking at the text to identify keywords, which in this case are relevant terms, related to the information you want to extract from that content. Suppose you are reading a twenty page article on People Management, but the subject that really matters to you is Productivity. In that case, you do not have to read all twenty pages which will certainly tell you about various other issues that are not important to you right now. Instead, just look through the article for terms directly related to productivity, such as "time," "organization," "concentration," and so on. When you find one of these terms, you just need to read that passage. Thus, you quickly get information that is of interest to you and "skip" the rest. WOT 6. Monitor your performance Once you incorporate what you have learned in the first five steps, the evolution of your speed reading will depend on practice. But to see if it's working, you need to keep track of your progress. So, the sixth step is picking up a timer and monitoring how many words you read per minute. As a reference, keep in mind that a typical reader reads, on average, 150 words per minute. Meanwhile, a good speed reading practitioner can read up to 800 words per minute. But do not just monitor speed. Take into account, also, the use of reading, that is, how much you can understand the text without having to return to it a second time. Your goal should be an average of 80% utilization. Remember that there is no point in speeding up reading, and thereby lessening the understanding of what has been read, as the re reading also represents a waste of time. 7. Train Your Focusing Ability Now that we've covered the best strategies for speed reading itself, let's take a few tips that will enhance your reading experience as a whole and as a result, help you absorb more information in less time. The ability to stay focused while reading is critical to being productive and not wasting time. The deeper you "plunge" into the text, the better you understand what the author wrote. What happens, then, if you go to every two paragraphs to check the notifications on your cell phone? The experience will be interrupted and continually resumed, which diminishes your ability to comprehend and thus takes you to take more time to understand what is read. In this way, you waste twice as much time: the extra time it takes to understand what you read, and the precious minutes wasted with distractions (Smartphone, computer, social networks, etc.). If you often suffer from it, the key is to turn productivity into a habit. To do so, when you read, keep the distractions away. This means not leaving the phone nearby, not keeping the computer by your side and, if possible, turning off the internet or at least placing your devices in airplane mode. This time is for you to dedicate to the text and nothing else! The more you can focus on reading, the better your ability to practice speed reading. 8. Find a quiet place to do your reading The place you choose to do your readings also greatly influences the speed and dynamism of the activity something very connected to the danger represented by the distractions, as we just mentioned. Noise from traffic, from work, from an establishment (such as a bar, for example) and even from music can disturb your ability to concentrate, making you frequently "quit" reading. Also, if you are reading in an environment with other people, you will also be directly interrupted if they speak to you, even if it is a quick dialogue. Besides being silent, it is also important that the chosen corner for reading is comfortable. When you are comfortable reading, it is much easier to indulge in the text and devote your full attention to it. And if you have a special space where you like to read, another advantage is that this will make it easier to establish reading as an integral part of your routine. 9. Do not insist when you are tired You may have heard that it is not very productive for a student to spend the night studying for a test that will be given the following day. At that point, the desperation of a few extra hours of study is no longer as important as the rest, which will allow more focus and better memory for the student during the test. The same principle can be applied to speed reading. When we are tired, regardless of whether the exhaustion reaches our site and/or head, our ability to concentrate decreases dramatically. You will find yourself having to read and reread the same passage several times, and of course, it takes much longer to read each line. And the worst part is that the following day you can pick up the text and realize you cannot remember much of anything you read the night before. This is because a tired brain also decreases its ability to retain information. So, an important point of speed reading is to know the time to stop. 10. Read whenever you can What the reader does not like to sit in their favorite armchair and deliver hours and hours to a relevant and high quality text? However, as you well know, this is not always (or rather, almost never!) possible. Does this mean, then, that you are bound to a routine? Of course not! It turns out you do not have to self punch yourself for not being able to devote several hours of each day to reading. Start enjoying every free minute, especially with regards to idle time spent in queues, waiting rooms, or on public transportation, for example. And how about going a little early to bed, every night, and reading before bed? A block of fifteen or twenty minutes in which you would do nothing when dedicated to reading becomes time well spent. With this, you advance much faster in your readings, although you cannot read much each day. Another advantage is that this will help you build the daily habit of reading and, who knows, it will even encourage you to separate a few hours of your day into the activity. Do you already practice speed reading? What is your speed and reading achievement? If you have not yet reached the goals proposed here, do not worry. Reading is a habit you cannot be afraid to develop, and the benefits are gigantic. Keep in mind, however, that the tendency is to improve your vocabulary with constant reading. And with a complete vocabulary, you will have more and more facility to read and understand longer texts. Essential Tips You Should Know About Speed Reading Learn how to read more quickly by ensuring that all the content you learn is not lost in your mind after a few days. Answer quickly! Do you read fast or slow? Have you ever tried to calculate your reading speed? By chance, have you heard of dynamic reading? If not, you should. Well, if you love reading or even depending on it for studies, this advanced reading mode could help you a lot! Dynamic reading is a faster type of reading which makes you read a lot ina short time. You may be thinking reading fast is easy, but you cannot memorize it that way. Therefore, dynamic reading ensures this without impairing its ability to absorb content. We've prepared some essential tips for you to start increasing your reading speed. Understand: There are different types of reading speed. There are some reading differences that you may not know about and it is important to know. As we said, a more agile and concentrated reading reduces the time needed for learning. Therefore, it optimizes productivity and ensures that all content learned is not lost in your mind after a few days. And this is essential for students, contestants, or even law and medical market professionals who need to read constantly. But this is not restricted to a group of people. Dynamic reading can help someone who already has a habit of reading to make you a reader with an even greater repertoire. It must be understood that dynamic reading has two fundamental factors: content speed and retention. In short, reading too slowly can hinder the progress of any reading, or studies. Just like reading too fast and not understanding the subject is not good either. Therefore, it is essential to find a balance by reading at a fast speed that does not detract from the retention of information. Valuable tips for anyone who wants to start dynamic reading. e Start slowly. Read every 15 minutes free! e Subtract only minutes from your daily activities to read. e Read for 20 minutes while waiting for dinner to be ready in the oven. e Read while waiting for the bus to work and if possible, even within driving. With time and practice, dynamic reading will already be in your effortlessly! Chapter 12. Perfecting the Skill of Analyzing People Through the Practice ne of the best things you can do if you want to improve your ability to analyze people is to read more often. Think about the plot, each of the characters and other options of what could happen. This will stimulate your thinking. It also provides an excellent opportunity for you to check your logic skills. Furthermore, it will expand your imagination. These things will, in turn, increase your ability to analyze people. If you don't have time to read or the inclination but spend significant amounts of time driving every day, whether commuting or driving for work or for whatever reason, find some thought provoking podcasts to listen to. These can also stimulate your thinking. Most of them will offer useful tips on how to stimulate your creativity and challenging ideas and thoughts. This all works together to increase your mental capacity which you've guessed it increases your ability to analyze people. You may not believe this, but it has been shown that regular exercise of moderate intensity has been shown to be directly related to increased mental capacity. There are all different types of exercise that you can choose from, but if you choose something like tai chi that you have to learn and memorize moves as well as execute them fluidly, you may increase your mental capacity and your physical stamina as well. Playing brain games is a great way to increase your mental capacity as well as your analytical skills. You can turn off the tv and play a game with your family and track your progress over time. Perhaps your family is not interested in playing brain games, but no worry, there are many brain games out there that you can play by yourself. Expand your circle of acquaintances. There is nothing wrong with having a close group you generally associate with, but conversations will most likely follow similar paths. Socializing with people you don't normally interact with can offer you different ideas, perspectives, and stimulating conversation. If you're not sure where to begin, you can begin by attending a networking gathering and interact with each person there. You may be surprised at how much interacting with new people will stimulate your thinking and get new ideas flowing. Keeping a journal is a good way to improve your logical abilities as well. We tend to get caught up in things and it is easy to feel overwhelmed, but when you write things down it tends to remove the emotion from it and let you look at it in a logical way. It also makes it easier to look back on things and track your progress. An essential yet often overlooked task is to learn something new every day. It's not relevant so much what you learn as the fact that you need to learn new things every day. It can be a new recipe you try or a new hobby you develop. Often once schooling is finished and the day to day of work takes over many people forget all about learning. Learning new things keeps your mind active and just like any muscle the more it's exercised the better shape it will be in. If you do have time that you could devote to education, you might want to look at some online courses. The key is to pick something you have no experience in. After all, we want to learn new things not just improve on the skills we already have. There is a wide range of topics that are available in online courses now. It shouldn't be too hard to find something that you have no past experience in. If you're struggling in any area of your life, it is quite likely that you will be able to find an app to help you analyze your habits and pick out and correct any bad habits you have developed. The more well rounded you are as a person, the better able you will be to read someone else. Self improvement is acommonly overlooked method of improving any skill. Balance is key to success, so to be successful at learning to read people, you need to read yourself and find balance. Get curious about something. Curiosity inspires our motivation, which in turn inspires our creativity and intelligence. Curiosity causes us to question ourselves and those questions encourage us to consider alternate methods and possible outlets. This causes us to compare what we previously knew, or thought we knew, with what we have learned. This leads to logical solutions. So, when the curiosity bug bites you, embrace it and ask questions. After all the more you learn the better your analytical skills will become. Practice being observant. It is all too common nowadays for people to be engaged in rushing around trying to get things done as quickly as they can and not focusing so much on how well they can get them done. Take the time to slow down and focus on the details. Pay attention to your surroundings and see what is going on around you. Watching how somebody does something might spark an idea for you or give you insights as to how to solve an issue you were dealing with. A key element of improving your analytical skills is to challenge yourself to constantly learn more. If you're open while you do this, you will increase your ability to appreciate and comprehend different concepts. This will, in turn, assist in streamlining your process of finding solutions. Math problems are an excellent way of improving your analytical skills. They are structured in such a way that you are provided information and then forced to use that information to find the solution. The more complicated math problems you solve, the more your logic and reasoning skills will develop. This, in turn, means the more your analytical ability will increase. Some things you can do is identify math problems in everyday life, and then take the time to solve them. Or if you have the ability and access, you could enroll in a college level math course. Many of these courses will help you develop your analytical skills. Some of you may be pleased to know that there are a number of video games available now that help to improve analytical skills. The ones that focus on strategy and other games that require solving problems to achieve big goals. Debate clubs are excellent ways of increasing your analytical abilities. Your point of view and theories will constantly be challenged by people who are also trying to improve their own analytical abilities. Your analytical skills will develop with participation in almost any social group providing it promotes seeking knowledge and exchanging of ideas. There are a number of ways to improve your analytical ability, and these can be broken down into many more categories I'm sure, but one thing that can have a profound impact on your ability to analyze things, people or problems, is to expand your knowledge base. The more you have in your knowledge base, the more tools you will have to choose from when it comes to understanding and interpreting information. Also, there are many ways to increase your knowledge base. When it is recommended to read lots, it does not mean pick a topic or genre that you enjoy and read lots about it. The best method of improving your knowledge base is to read lots over a wide range of genres or topics. Subscribe to informative magazines, attend lectures or other academical talks. You could consider going back to college or taking other educational classes in your community. Learn to take the time to think about things. This applies to everything in your life, the more time you take to think about things before making decisions the more your analytical skills will improve. This doesn't mean to dawdle in making decisions, but the important part is to look at the situation from different perspectives and to visualize alternate scenarios. Don't immediately choose the easiest solution but think about it and consider all options and outcomes. Don't discard the easiest solution either though. It could prove to be the best one after all, but it is best to consider all options before making a decision. An excellent example of this would be a chess game. Before you make a move figure out what your opponent’s most likely response will be. Then continue to think about all the other options of responses he or she could make. In this way not only will your chess game improve, but your analytical abilities will increase as well. Expanding your world view is one of the best ways to improve your analytical abilities. While this may sound simple, it is not a quick fix and is not easily done. The results are fabulous though. Travel is a great way to expand your world view, but that is not always feasible in every situation. Other ways to expand your world views is to set aside your religious, political and cultural beliefs about truth. Think of different ways of viewing the world. Different perspectives to look at it from. Pick a position or idea you would normally dismiss immediately, and work to understand it. How would you defend this position to someone like you that would normally dismiss it without really even considering it? You can also go out of your way to meet people and interact with people who are very different from yourself, this will help you to learn to accept and learn to understand ideas that are different from what you would normally associate yourself with. Teach yourself to find the connections in things. Many things that we encounter on a daily basis are connected and those connections are most often overlooked. This can be exercised on a walk in the bush, what animals do you see? What connections do they have with other animals, seasons, pollution, the list is almost never ending? Learn to look at things in a cause and effect method. With your walk in the bush, and the animals you're seeing, what would happen to their water supply if there was a severe drought? Where would the repercussions of that stop, or would they? Think also about the similarities between things. Are all living things the same? Do spiders require any of the same things as humans do to survive? Historical connections are another area to look at. What cycles, patterns, and trends do you notice? What about the difference before and after the war? Paying attention to detail is extremely important. There is a saying that says the devil is in the details. If you don't know or don't understand the ins and outs of a problem, or all the details of something you're trying to find a solution for, you are a lot less likely to come up with a workable solution that will actually address the areas of concern. Another way of honing your analytical and observational skills that is extremely helpful is to contemplate the natural order of things. Instead of just accepting that things are the way they are, try to figure out why they are that way. This will give you a new and improved understanding of the world, and you will be motivated to think about complex issues. Keep questioning instead of just accepting the easy answer. The easy answer will come quickly, and many people stop there. Don't fall into this trap. Keep questioning until you get an answer that is more thorough and complete. Conclusion any of the so called great people would probably blush with shame if someone suddenly removed the immaterial veil that hides many of their shortcomings and vices from prying eyes ... These people, strong and great in public life, in private life are often weak and insignificant. Knowledge of the basic principles of psychology and analysis of human behavior, character traits and personality types can play an important role in the life of any person. In order for us to be able to most effectively fulfill our goals and effectively interact with people around us, we need to have at least an idea of what personality psychology, non verbal communication, methods of manipulation, and recognition of lies are. When we understand these issues, we gain the opportunity to make our lives more productive, comfortable, and harmonious. Surely, you have repeatedly thought about how great it would be to be able to read the thoughts of others. To some, intuition helps with this, but if you do not have such insight, there is only one thing left: to learn to understand body language. Aristotle wrote that “all the passions of the soul are connected to the body, since the body is subject to significant changes in the presence of passions." We often do not pay attention to our movements; meanwhile, they not only carry information that our mind perceives, but also are able to influence another person. The information on personality psychology in the context of analyzing people presented is designed specifically for you to be able to learn these important fundamentals and learn how to use them in practice as efficiently as possible. The ability to make predictions will help you predict the behavior of other people. Applying various patterns to yourself, whether it is to speak loudly (be sociable), be able to maintain eye contact, trying to understand the reaction of people around you, and knowing if people react negatively to their environment or conversation; you will become a real connoisseur of human souls and be able to acquire power over others. If you manage to learn to identify emotions, you can make assumptions that lead to such emotions. If you start to make forecasts and observe other people, then you can learn how to determine how the conversation is going. You’ll also be able to analyze the situation and ask yourself “What happened?” By analyzing other people, you will learn not only to read them well, but also to understand what causes emotions in people; you will be able to better attract attention, become a more interesting person, and become what you would like to become. We are not born charismatic or non charismatic, confident or unassertive this is just a set of your thoughts and actions. PART IT — Brainwashing Introduction rainwashing refers to erasing from one’s belief system the existing set of old beliefs and in its place supplanting a new set of beliefs. Brainwashing happens without someone’s will. While sometimes, brainwashing is subtle and involuntary, a lot of time it is violent. For example, we have had forced conversions during the crusade period and also during the jihad. In the forced conversion, the victims are fully aware that they are being brainwashed but accept it as a coping mechanism to avoid greater harm such as death. Violent brainwashing happens most in the militant cultic or criminal organizations where victims are trapped and have no exit option. Potential victims of violent brainwashing include: e Prisoners (especially prisoners of war) e Slaves under captivity e Kidnapped victims e Illegal aliens In the subtle brainwashing, often the victim voluntarily and unknowingly accepts brainwashing. In this case, the perpetrator looks out for susceptible victims who are more malleable. The victims are often in a desperate situation and thus have a psychological void that desires fulfillment. The following are some of the potential victims of unknowing brainwashing: e Those suffering from unknown chronic illness e Minors who have left their home to live alone and often faraway e Those who have lost their jobs and are in deep despair e Those who have lost their loved ones, especially through divorce or death Common steps in brainwashing The following are some of the common steps taken by brainwashers to brainwash their victims: 1. Isolation 2. Attack on self esteem 3. Subjugation 4. Testing 5. Love bombing [solation The brainwasher knows that a person’s family or close circle can easily notice what is happening and thus rescue the victim. As such, the first step they take is to isolate the victim from close family and friends. Some, like cultic leaders, can instill negativities about close family and friends. This brings division between the victim and loved ones and thus breeds psychological isolation. For example, a cultic leader can claim that your closest friend is a psychic vampire that drains your energy thus making you chronically ill and as such, you ought to keep off from that friend. Since you are sick and desperate, you are likely to follow this brainwashing tactic and thus find yourself isolated from the very person who could have saved you from brainwashing. Attack on self esteem It is only a victim who has self doubt, low self confidence, and on the overall suffers from low self esteem that can easily be brainwashed. As such, the brainwasher seeks to achieve this state in the victim by attacking the victim’s self esteem. Some of the ways by which the brainwasher attacks the victim’s self esteem include: Verbal and physical abuse — this often applied in violent brainwashing where the brainwasher uses abuse as a means of demeaning the victim so that the victim loses self worth. Sleep deprivation — a sleep deprived person is more likely to submit to psychological pressure since there is lack of full consciousness. It is much easier for a sleep deprived person to submit to brainwashing instructions just to have an opportunity to be left alone and sleep. Intimidation—Intimidation is one of the tactics employed by brainwashers to push someone into involuntary submission. For example, the threat of punishment is a form of intimidation. Embarrassment — this is used especially if the victim has some dark secret that he or she wouldn’t like to be revealed. For example, a brainwasher may resort to using tricks to obtain nude photos of a potential victim or trick such a victim into marital infidelity. Once the brainwasher acquires these materials, he/she starts subtly embarrassing the victim. In this subtle embarrassment, the brainwasher doesn’t reveal the materials to the public but uses generalized terms that insinuate immorality on the part of the victim. The victim knows where the cues are leading to and thus does everything possible to dissuade the brainwasher from revealing these embarrassing contents. Thus, the brainwasher attains an upper hand which he/she uses to brainwash the victim. For example, the victim could be forced into performing rituals that wear the victim’s self worth and self esteem thus becoming deeply captive to the brainwasher. Eventually, the victim may be infected by the Stockholm syndrome, where, instead of acting against the brainwasher, acts to protect the brainwasher — an act, which, subconsciously is more about protecting the “secrets” (embarrassing content). e Scarcity creation such as rationing of basic necessities and only released upon the victim’s obedient performance. Subjugation Brainwashers seek to bring the victim under their absolute control so that the victims become absolutely obedient. The following are some of the tactics used to achieve subjugation: e Extreme abuse e Us vs Them e Love bombing Extreme abuse The victim is passed through extreme abuse. Almost often emotional and psychological abuses are employed. Physical abuse is only employed in violent brainwashing. Physical abuse is not employed in the subtle brainwashing. Us vs Them The victim is coerced to make a choice between the brainwasher and the rest of the world. However, the victim is not granted an exit option. The victim is introduced to those who are already brainwashed and thus praise the brainwasher. In case the victim still thinks of “them” (the outside world) as an option, the victim continues to be subjected to extreme abuse until he or she comes the ultimate choice of belonging to “us”, that is, joining the rest of the brainwashed subjects. Testing Testing happens to establish whether the victim has ultimately made the “us’ choice and no longer desires to join “them”. It is also done to test the victim’s level of obedience. Sometimes, under secret control, the victim may be released to “them” (the rest of the world) on the condition that he or she should return on a certain date. The victim is then secretly monitored to see whether he/she desires to return to “us” (the brainwashed group). If the victim does not desire to return to “us”, then, the victim is kidnapped and returned to the fold upon which the vicious cycle begins. On the other hand, if the victim voluntarily returns to us, then, the victim is taken to the next stage, that is, love bombing. More often than not, due to isolation and induced dependency, even if the victim desires to rejoin “them”, the victim finds it such a long journey to recovery and hence prefers getting back to “us” rather than starting all over again to rebuild the lost life. Love bombing Once tests are done and prove that the victim has been effectively brainwashed, love bombing is applied to galvanize the victim into the fold. Love bombing could be in the form of praising, promotion in the order of subjects, receiving gifts, etc. Chapter 1 What is Brainwashing? f you ask someone if they know what brainwashing is, they will probably reply that they do. Brainwashing is a concept that many people have heard of, while mistaking their vague familiarity for accurate understanding. Before looking at how, where, and why brainwashing occurs, it is essential to understand exactly what brainwashing is and isn’t. Of all the dark psychology techniques contained in this book, brainwashing has the most serious and widest impact. If the other dark psychology techniques are sniper bullets, aimed at one particular person, brainwashing is a nuclear bomb capable of devastating an entire city. The term brainwashing refers to the slow process of replacing a person’s ideas about identity and belief with new ideas that are intended to suit the purpose of the person doing the brainwashing. Brainwashing can occur in both wider and narrower contexts. For example, a brainwasher is able to control one person in particular, or use the same techniques and principles to control the minds of a wider group at once. Brainwashing is the process that turns atheists into suicide bombers and prisoners of war into communists. It has been tried, tested, and proven over the years to be effective in almost any scenario. So, what are the most common misunderstandings related to brainwashing? Many people picture the process as some kind of quick and forced occurrence. Picture either Alex in “A Clockwork Orange” or Neo in “The Matrix” having concepts forced into their cranium, involuntarily, in a short space of time. This is Hollywood brainwashing and is far from what actually occurs in real life. The process of real world brainwashing will be explored in detail later in this chapter, but at its simplest, brainwashing is a process involving the slow, gradual, and seemingly voluntary changing of a person’s “map of reality” from the one they have freely put together to one that is forced upon them by the brainwasher. The evil irony of the technique is the brainwasher will ensure the victim feels in control at all times. Brainwashing Contexts So, what are some of the main situations that are fertile breeding grounds for brainwashers? Before the process of brainwashing itself is explored fully, let’s take a look at the situations in which people are often brainwashed and the motivations behind this. A lot of people would agree with the idea that “cults brainwash people” but few would be able to explain exactly what a cult is and how they brainwash their recruits. Let’s demystify the process. A cult is a fringe group, often built around a charismatic leader who is able to exert high levels of influence over their followers. The cult will usually provide a “complete understanding of reality” to those who follow it. Why exactly is this cult context one in which brainwashing flourishes? The primary attraction of cults is they present reality as something very simple and within reach of the average person, provided the person is willing to take on board the cult’s teachings. We live in a complex modern world where life can seem confusing and overwhelming. Cults cut through this confusion and tell people “don’t worry, we have the answer.” The way in which this “answer” is presented is intended to play on the human need for belonging and acceptance. Brainwashing can flourish in this context as a result of the idea of the “new normal.” What exactly is “the new normal”? It is a way in which cults are able to influence those they brainwash into accepting their teachings by making them seem prevalent, accepted and positive. For example, the idea of worshipping a man who claims to be God would be incredibly strange in everyday life. Within the closed environment of a cult, however, this behavior becomes “normal” to the extent that not doing it would seem strange to people within the cult! This process of persistent, social reinforcement is one of the most powerful ways in which the ideological brainwashing of cults is able to occur. Think of cults as drug dealers. Perhaps the newcomer to the cult had been seeking something in their life and came across the cult, just as newcomers to the world of drugs often, misguidedly, seek out their first high of their own volition. The cult doesn’t need to “push” the drug of their ideology onto the victim as the victim was already seeking the fulfillment of a void in their life. It is this initial “search” and “readiness” on the part of the people who are later brainwashed that makes them so susceptible to the brainwashing process itself. Ideologies are another context, similar to cults, in which brainwashing is commonplace. The difference between a cult and an ideology is the focus of the ideology is on the idea itself rather than the person delivering the message and those who follow them. Whereas cults brainwash people into placing faith and trust in the cult leader and their followers, ideological brainwashing involves leading people to place absolute trust in an idea. Ideological brainwashing is incredibly dangerous due to the fact it goes above and beyond any one individual. Think of extremist religious terrorism, for example. It is possible for a high profile figure within the ideology, such as Osama Bin Laden, to be killed. Does this kill support for the idea itself? No! The dead figures are praised as martyrs who gave their life to the ideology, thus increasing its attractiveness and allure to potential newcomers. Almost any ideology is likely to have an extremist, fringe outskirt in which brainwashing takes place. Even something seemingly innocent like a pop band can have this impact. Young fans, at a psychologically impressionable age, link their sense of identity, happiness, and belonging to a pop group. They will gladly defend this group to extents that are unusually intense. Some pop groups have fans that even self harm, using razor blades, if a member quits the group! If you carefully consider this phenomenon of the power of brainwashing even in accidental, innocent contexts, then consider how devastating the process can be in intended contexts like cults and terrorist groups. Now that you have a clear understanding of the way brainwashing can occur in broader social contexts, such as cults and ideologies, it is important to understand that a personal, one on one context is also a ripe situation for elements of brainwashing to occur in. There are similarities and differences between “group” and “individual” brainwashing and understanding these nuances can help to identify when either type is occurring. Personal brainwashing is similar to group brainwashing as it involves the slow and steady replacement of existing beliefs with new beliefs that serve the objectives of the brainwasher. Instead of relying on group dynamics to reinforce “the new normal,” a one on one brainwashing situation will instead rely on a deep, personal connection between the brainwasher and the victim. This can be even more powerful than group brainwashing as the content can be modified and altered to the particular psychological constitution of the victim The Process of Brainwashing Now that you understand the reality of what brainwashing is, and where it occurs, let’s take a look at the specific process itself. Distinctions will be drawn between the way in which the process applies to both group and individual situations. The starting point of any episode of brainwashing is the mental state and social circumstance of the victim. This is the foundation upon which the rest of the process is entirely reliant. Brainwashing is not something that can be carried out on absolutely anyone. It requires the identification of a person who is seeking something or trying to fill a void in their life. So, what kind of people are ideal victims for brainwashers? People who have had their existing reality shaken up by a recent event are prime targets for brainwashers. For example, many of the Western men who have travelled to become terrorists in Syria, and detonate suicide bombs, have done so after the death of a close friend or relative. When their existing world loses its meaning and certainty, brainwashers can step in and provide that certainty in the form of a murderous ideology. Once a brainwashing victim has been identified, either in person or via the Internet, the actual process of brainwashing begins. Contrary to the popular image of a brainwasher as a wide eyed psychopath who will incessantly and angrily indoctrinate their victim, real world brainwashers are anything but this. They will come across as calm, friendly, rational people who have their lives together in a way the victim does not. Imagine being homeless and being befriended by a celebrity. This is how the process of meeting their brainwasher for the first time feels for a victim. The brainwasher will often work initially on creating a level of trust and rapport between themselves and their victim. This usually involves creating both deep and superficial similarities. For example, superficial similarities may involve surface level preferences like an enjoyment of the same sport or even food! Deeper level rapport may involve some “deep” shared experience in the past of both the brainwasher and the victim. Brainwashers will convincingly fake these if needed. If the victim shares the fact that they have lost a relative in the past, guess what? The brainwasher suddenly has a similar story to tell. The false emotional warmth and connection explained above is not the only aspect of brainwashing that occurs initially. The brainwasher will often provide gifts and other favors to their victim. For example, the brainwasher may treat them to meals or send them gadgets or other useful items. This creates a sense of gratitude and indebtedness from the victim to their brainwasher and softens up any resistance the victim may initially experience. One of the most powerful examples of the above initial kindness can be taken from Prisoner of War camps. When American troops have been captured in the past, their captors often offer them American cigarettes and speak to them in a respectful way. This reverses the expectations of the victim and opens the victim’s mind to the further brainwashing process that is to follow. A utopian presentation is the next step in the brainwashing process, following the initial victim identification and rapport building stages. This involves the brainwasher slowly and increasingly offering a solution to all of the problems that the victim has opened up about. This is always done in a casual, offhand way at first to avoid any negative experiences of pressure the victim may experience otherwise. This utopian solution is always whatever cult, ideology or personality the brainwasher is trying to convert their victim to—terrorism, communism or just a charismatic brainwasher’s own need for validation and praise. When performed correctly, the initial stages of this process will leave a victim craving more and more information and understanding of the solution that is being hinted at. The brainwasher may even withhold this information initially, as if it is something that the victim must work at being worthy of attaining. This will lead to a strong motivation on behalf of the victim to seek out and accept the information they are eventually provided with. Thanks to the preceding steps, the poisonous ideas that are being implanted into the victim will seem as natural and refreshing as cold water on a hot day. Once the victim is being spoon fed snippets of their new belief system, and responding well to them, the brainwasher will be very careful to reveal the right things at the right time. This is a concept that is sometimes known as “milk before meat” or “gradual revelation.” It basically involves the presentation of easy to accept ideas before anything controversial is revealed. For example, in the case of religious terrorism, recruiters may initially focus on convincing their victim that God loves them. This is usually quite acceptable. More objectionable ideas, such as God wants you to blow yourself up, are saved until far further down the line. At this point, the brainwashing has reached the point of no return. You may be questioning way a victim continues to engage with their brainwasher once the objectionable ideas begin to become apparent. The reason is threefold. First, the already vulnerable victim now feels a strong sense of liking and approval of their brainwasher. Second, the victim has invested time and sometimes money into the process thus far. This is known as the “sunk cost fallacy.” The victim is loath to “throw away all their hard work” by walking away from the process. Finally, the brainwasher is likely to have amassed a lot of secretive and sensitive information on their victim. This “dirt” can then be held over the victim’s head, either discreetly or overtly. Both the ideas of a vulnerable victim and the “sunk cost fallacy” make logical sense. The idea of blackmail and control may be harder to understand at first. Why would a victim respond well to such threats? Well, they are rarely presented in a threatening way. For example, if the victim has divulged a lot of sensitive information to a brainwasher, and then begins to give signs of walking away, the brainwasher may appear concerned and insist that “if I can’t help you anymore with your problems, I need to make sure someone else can. Perhaps your family or boss need to know what’s been going on with you, so they can look out for you when I’m not there.” Because of the deep sense of rapport and warmth the brainwasher has manipulated their victim into feeling, the above form of blackmail and control is often actually perceived as kind, compassionate behavior. It is often enough to make the victim see “sense” and agree to remain on the brainwashing path they have embarked upon. Brainwashers are adept at making the pain and struggle of walking away seem epic, so staying becomes the preferable, easy option by default. The end product of this process is the victim believing everything they have been indoctrinated to view as the truth. The power of the process is that the victim will feel they have chosen these views as their own and have sought them out through their own volition. This leaves a previously normal individual as an indoctrinated psychological slave to something they have no idea even exists. The Impact of Brainwashing The above analysis of the brainwashing process shows the severity and depth of the technique. It is inevitable that a process as powerful as this has lasting consequences. Some of the main impacts of brainwashing after the process has been completed will now be explored. Loss of identity is one of the most serious side effects of brainwashing. A feature of many cults and ideologies is that people who complete their initiation process are given a new name. This allows the person’s psyche to totally detach from their old identity. They can believe things and do things they would never have done before as the person they used to be no longer exists. When carried out carefully the brainwashing process leaves a victim feeling as if their old identity was no more real or permanent than a nightmare from which they have awoken. So, is brainwashing simply a process of ideas? Not at all. If brainwashing resulted in only the change of opinions then it would be far less of a problem than it actually is. The main danger of brainwashing is it not only changes the ways that people think and feel but also the way they behave. People go from functional members of the society with acceptable, positive jobs and interests to brainwashed zombies willing to carry out rape, murder, and suicide. This sounds sensational and dramatic, but it’s true. Read on for the proof. If you have any doubts about what brainwashing can drive a person to, consider the following examples. Members of some religious cults will gladly cut off all contact from their family, leave their careers behind, surrender all their wealth and possessions, and place their autonomy entirely in the hands of the organization that has brainwashed them. This is not all. The victim will see their new lifestyle as a blessing they are fortunate to have, rather than something unpleasant they have been forced into. Another example of the toxic outcome of brainwashing is the repeated tale of young people becoming brainwashed by religious extremists to travel to a foreign land and drive a car packed full of explosives into a group of people they have never met and who have never hurt them. Such young victims are often educated people with a track record of success in life and a family history free of turmoil or abuse. These tragic losses of life are testament to the overwhelming, all conquering power of the brainwashing process. PTSD (post traumatic stress disorder) is another hallmark of those who manage to escape, or are rescued from, a situation of intense brainwashing. Brainwashing victims often show the same physical and psychological signs as war veterans who have witnessed their friends being blown apart next to them during combat. The severity of this traumatic aftermath shows that a brainwashing situation can harm a person as much as a world war. Perhaps the most shocking examples of the long term impact of brainwashing are the numerous instances of people who have been rescued or escaped from a brainwashing situation, only to later return of their own free will. Even once they are outside of the controlling, brainwashing environment, the legacy of the process runs so deep through a person’s mind, they seek to return to it. This is a form of Stockholm syndrome. The escapees will actually praise their brainwashers far into the future and defend, support, and justify the ideological stances they were indoctrinated with while captive. Chapter 2 The Power of Persuasion ersuasion is perhaps one of the most innocent ways to control the mind of someone else. In a sense, it qualifies as mind control because it is literally causing someone to shift how they are thinking in line with what the persuader thinks is right. When you are able to master the art of persuading others, you will be able to yield that power when it is necessary, in ways that can be beneficial to both you and those around you that you seek to persuade. Of the different forms of dark psychology, this one is the least insidious. It does not hide and does not attempt to force someone else into doing something. Instead, it is open and honest— advertising its purpose and seeking to encourage those around the individual to do something because they want to rather than out of coercion. The persuader wants everyone to agree with him or her, but not badly enough to force the point or coerce others. When attempting to persuade someone, there are six principles that should be remembered. Understanding and utilizing these can be incredibly useful when it comes to influencing other people. These six principles are reciprocity, consistency, social proof, likability, authority, and scarcity. Take the next several moments to familiarize yourself with each of these. Reciprocity This is perhaps the most basic of the principles of persuasion—in fact, it is so simple, you have already been introduced to this concept within this. Reciprocity is the concept of people wanting to give back when they receive. When you help someone, the other person is far more likely to help you. Reciprocity seeks to harness that concept, recognizing it as a truth of humanity, and seeing how useful it can be in encouraging others to do as a persuader desire. This can be seen even in restaurant settings—when the waiter or waitress brings you a few chocolates or a complimentary treat like a fortune cookie at the end of your meal with your check; you are far more likely to want to give a larger tip than if you had received nothing instead. This explains why so Many restaurants do offer up that cheap mint or cookie in response—they want to earn that extra tip. You can utilize this concept yourself by always making it a point to consider what you can do for other people before seeking the other person to do something for you instead. If you stop and ask what they can do for you, you are not likely to get as far as if you stop and ask what you can do for someone else first. Your mind will be blown the next time you try this. To start, try doing this in a relatively low stakes environment. Perhaps ask your spouse how you can help one evening, and after the fact, ask your spouse for a favor. Your spouse, if the favor is reasonable, is likely to concede! Consistency Consistency is a bit trickier to understand. It is the idea that people make active commitments to the world around them, and they feel obligated to follow through with it. When you have a commitment, you feel the drive to follow through, simply because you want to be considered reliable and committed. While this may not necessarily seem relevant to persuasion, consider this point: If you can get someone to offer a commitment to something, you are more likely to get them to follow through after the fact. People are innately driven to complete whatever they have promised to do so. If you want someone to do something for you, then, you should always seek to get it put into a commitment of sorts in order to ensure it is completed. With the commitment made, you should then make it known to those around you. Through publicizing the individual’s commitment, such as by telling people at work that John over there has agreed to help you with your copying all week, you add an extra layer of pressure to the individual. John is far more likely to try to follow through simply because he wants others to see him as reliable as well. When there are multiple people’s thoughts about him on the line, he is far more inclined to push through and complete whatever he has agreed to do so. Keep in mind, however, that this has to be voluntary. The other person has to want to do whatever it is you are asking them, or they are not going to really feel compelled to follow through with finishing the task. For example, if you attempt to coerce the other person into doing your copying, and they reluctantly agree just to get you off their back, they are not going to feel that same innate drive to finish the work as if they had volunteered to do so on their own. Social Proof When is the last time you have walked into a room, looked around, and been entirely unsure what you were supposed to be doing? If you are not sure, think about the last time you went to a busy public building for the first time—you may have been entirely confused as to what you would be expected to do or where you should wait. Instead of standing there without doing anything, you likely looked to the cues of those around you—you appealed to social proof. You wanted to fit in, and so you chose to do what those around you were doing, even though you were still unsure that that was the right thing to do. People oftentimes rely on the social cues from those around them to understand what they should be doing, thinking, or feeling. Specifically, people want to follow their peers rather than authorities or subordinates. Understanding this concept can be incredibly important when it comes to persuasion—if you are going to be getting a new group of charges at work, the easiest way to get everyone in line is to get a single person on board first and allowing everyone else to follow that one particular person’s example. You just lessened your own workload and allowed for those around you to be trained quickly and easily. Likability Ultimately, people are far more likely to be persuaded when they like the person who is attempting to persuade them. It is a simple fact of life— people naturally reach out to those they know and trust and are more likely to take the advice of someone they trust than someone they do not. This can be used in a wide range of ways, and even if the other person is entirely new to you or does not know you well enough to like you, there are ways you can persuade them to like you so you can then persuade them at a later time. There are three things that cause people to be more likely to like someone. These are relatability, praising, and being able to cooperate toward a common goal. If you can harness these, you are far more likely to get someone else to like you. When you are relatable, people are likely to get along better with you. When you can relate to someone, you are better able to empathize, which can allow them to better see that they do like you. The easiest way to make yourself relatable in situations in which you are, for example, a salesperson, is to share a small detail about yourself early on or decorate your room or office with pictures or items that are relevant to you. Maybe you have pictures of your children up, or perhaps you decide to add a photo of yourself engaging in a hobby. Anything goes, so long as it personalizes you. Secondly, when you want to be likable, you should always make it a point to praise the other person. However, you cannot just make something up or say something that you do not mean—you need to make genuine compliments to the other person. When you lie about praise, you are often seen as doing so manipulatively and, in an attempt, to convince them to want to help out of sheer flattery. Even though you may actually be complimenting them more to get them to agree than out of kindness, you should still make sure that whatever you do say is genuine. Lastly, you want to make sure you and the other person are working toward the same goal. When you are both working together toward a common goal, the other person is going to be far more likely to want to work with you. Even in situations where you stand to benefit far more than the other person, such as in a Sales job when you are trying to sell a car, and you will literally make a commission based off of the cost of the car bought, you should make it clear that you are working toward a common goal. You can do this by pointing out that you want to help the other person, or through phrases such as, “help me help you” that make the other person feel like you are on their side. After all, you are—you want them to get what they want, while also wanting what they want to be mutually beneficial. Authority People naturally want to defer to authorities when it comes to certain situations and decision making. This is why people will go get consultations from lawyers or doctors, or they will go to a professional to help with taxes. When someone else is seen to have all of the pertinent information on something simply due to experience or education, it becomes far easier to just defer to whatever that person is thinking or suggesting. By recognizing the authority vested in someone else out of experience and education, people are able to avoid making the wrong decision due to a lack of experience or not knowing how something works. After all, would you want a daycare teacher to decide which surgery you should get to repair an issue? Unless that daycare teacher happened to also be certified as a surgeon, the answer is likely no. This is incredibly relevant to persuasion—if you can establish yourself as an authority on a topic somehow, people around you will be far more willing and happier to go along with whatever it is that you are requesting of them, which will serve you well. Luckily, there are several ways you can establish authority simply and quickly. The simplest way to do so is through making sure you keep your credentials visible. Place them on your nameplate, or hang your diploma on the wall right behind your desk. You could also make sure that when your clients come in, your secretaries offer some sort of detail that appeals to your authority. If you sell cars, your secretary may say something about how you are the top seller of the month, or if you are a dentist, the receptionist might sing your praises to the person making the appointment. You could also do this yourself by offering small snippets of details about yourself when the client first enters your office, such as making a comment about that one time you were in school at such and such prestigious university studying your major. By dropping your credentials subtly and naturally, you set yourself apart as an authority, and you will gain all of the persuasive power and influence with it. Scarcity The last of the principles of persuasion is scarcity. This one is also quite simple—it is literally supply and demand. When things are less readily available, people see them as more valuable, and when they are more readily available, they are seen as less valuable simply due to the ease of access. You can introduce scarcity in several different ways depending on the context. Within a relationship, you may put a time limit on making a serious decision, such as choosing to move in together or give an answer to a proposal. If you are attempting to sell someone something, you can make it clear that the offer that is on the table at that particular moment is limited and will expire shortly. This puts the pressure on the other person to decide quickly. While putting the limitations on the table, you should also make it a point to show how the other person is likely to lose out if they do not take the offer quickly. By focusing on what will be lost, the other person is more likely to act quickly simply because people do not like the idea of losing out. Another way to cause scarcity is to make something limited. Think of how restaurants will run limited time only items, such as fancy drinks or menu items. These are only available for a short period of time, and people often fall for the trick, trying to get in to get the limited time item just so they can say that they have. Especially today, with social media being so influential and people wanting to have everything social media ready, people are more likely to go out of their way to seek out a rare item just so they can say that they did so. Focus and don't leave yourself alone convinced because you were affected by at least one of these standards. Chapter 3 Steps in Brainwashing espite the fact that the art of brainwashing is so incredibly insidious, if you are able to take advantage of this process, you will find that it is far easier than it seems. It does not take much to entirely break down a person’s mind, so long as you have no qualms about utterly decimating the personality of someone else. If you are not afraid of destroying someone else, you will find that with just a handful of steps, that person can be destroyed and brainwashed. Of course, that does not mean that it is a quick process—it does take a significant amount of time to truly dismantle the mind of someone else. You will need to have the time, space, and blatant disregard for the law and other human life to take advantage of this technique. Assault on identity ' Channeling and releasing guilt Leniency Progress and harmony Final confession Self betrayal Breaking point Rebirth Assault on Identity Brainwashing is impossible if the individual that is being brainwashed is not willing to let go of who they are as a person. This means that the first stage of brainwashing is convincing them that they should not like the person that they are. In particular, you will spend time assaulting their identity in hopes of convincing them that their identity is problematic in some way. Effectively, you want to make them fear who they are and everything they value. For example, you may ask someone what their name is. If they answer with their name, you punish them severely and tell them that their name is something else. For example, imagine that the person’s name is Bill. He tells you that, and in response, you brutally beat him across the back with a board and then tell him that his name is Larry now. Every time that you ask him about his past, his identity, or anything else close to him and he answer truthfully, you would then beat him in order to make him fear the truth. You are effectively teaching him to fear the act of being honest with other people about who he is and because he does fear it, he is not likely to continue to repeat the mistake over and over. Guilt Next, it is time to instill guilt. As the other person is constantly being penalized for who they are, they effectively must be convinced that the abuse is their own fault. Maybe it was a fault of their culture or their family, or it was simply them as a person. You want them to effectively feel like they are responsible for their beatings and imprisonment, and you will get this through repetition. You will add more onto their plate as well—you may blame them for the fact that it is not sunny that day, or that something unrelated to him has happened. You want to lay on as much guilt as possible so the individual rejects themselves in favor of being able to reject the guilt. Self Betrayal Soon, the guilt will build up, as will the fear of torture if they continue to stand by who they are, and the individuals being brainwashed will find that it is easier to simply betray their identities than it is to stay true to themselves. They decide that they would rather break away from who they are as people in order to protect their lives, as they have reached a point of knowing that death will arrive if they are not careful. They would rather betray themselves, satisfying the fact that they need to survive, and they obey and submit. Breaking Point Upon denouncement of who they were as a person, the people being brainwashed find that they have hit their breaking point—they feel like they have lost all hope. They have accepted their new life and know that fighting back is futile. This is the beginning of the adoption of the new life that has been presented to them, as at that point, to the one being brainwashed, the choices are to assimilate or die, and they have already rejected who they once were. They officially give up at this stage and recognize that they will have no choice but to accept the new thoughts or cultures if they wish to survive. Leniency Next comes a ray of hope—someone that has been torturing the person being brainwashed to the brink of death, when he feels like he cannot possibly cope any longer, offers some sort of leniency. It may be a bit extra food, or a cigarette, or even just a kind word. It is then that hope is dangled in front of the individual and is seen as a legitimate option. The individual will latch onto that trust, seeing it as proof that they can, in fact, survive, if they play their cards right, and they latch onto that. The manipulator has officially won the trust of the one being brainwashed, and they begin to accept that all of the pain of torture will go away as soon as they are willing to give in and comply entirely. Compulsion to Confess At this point, the guilt becomes too unbearable for the individual—he feels like he cannot hold it in any longer and he feels that the only option is confession. He is driven to let go of that previous life and let’s go of it all. The manipulator, of course, encourages this, and soon, confessions are flying for anything possible. Even things that are not the fault of the brainwashed are confessed for in order to let go of all of that guilt. Progress and Harmony After that initial confession, the individual is slowly taught and assimilated. This stage is the education of the new identity and culture. People are encouraged to let go of the past. They agree to go along with what they are being taught out of fear of being returned to the past, in which they are treated poorly. Instead, they are given many basic human decencies to encourage them to continue to make their positive progress in their life. Final Confession Eventually comes the final confession—this is the stage at which they finally give up who they are for real. They are willing to renounce it all, seeing the beauty in what they have been taught and finding that they identify with the culture that has taken them in. They are willing to continue to coexist in this new social bubble and are willing to get in as soon as possible. Rebirth Finally comes the rebirth—at this stage, the prisoners are released. They are no longer being manipulated, simply because they already have been. Instead, they are indoctrinated and welcomed into the new society. While they are usually eager to get involved with the new life and the new people, they may be met with hesitation as people still see them as betrayers and foreigners. There is no amount of naming and ceremony, after all, that would allow the general population in that new circle to accept that they are the new person. Despite all of the effort that went into brainwashing, the general public still wishes to keep their distance, leaving the brainwashed remaining just as isolated as before. Chapter 4 Hypnosis ypnosis has been stepping the line among quackery and treatment since around the eighteenth century, yet as of late, it has been getting steam as an elective treatment for some issue. What is entrancing, does it work, and assuming this is the case, how? We research. The expression "hypnosis" is gotten from the Ancient Greek word for "rest" ("hypnosis"). Research recommends it was first instituted in the mid nineteenth century by Etienne Félix d'Henin de Cuvillers Trusted Source; a Frenchman keen on the job of recommendation on the psyche, and the psychological and conduct forms that occurred when somebody fell into a hypnotic trance. Other sources propose that it was Scottish specialist Dr. James Braid who begat the term. However, the idea of the mesmerizing daze was brought into the world before, in the eighteenth century, with the famous German physician Franz Mesmer Trusted Source. Mesmer guaranteed that he could feature the presence of something he called "animal magnetism," which is an undetectable liquid that "streams" between individuals, creatures, plants, and things, and which can be controlled to impact individuals' behavior. Mesmer's trick practices gave hypnosis an awful start. However, enthusiasm for its latent capacity persevered in the medicinal circle. In the twentieth and 21st hundreds of years, entrancing kept on being investigated, and pros have increased a superior comprehension of what it is and how it can now and again be harnessed to bring medical advantages. What do we know about hypnosis? An ongoing review Trusted Source distributed in the diary Neuroscience and Bio behavioral Reviews had characterized hypnosis as a sort of top down guideline of conscious awareness, a procedure where "mental portrayals [...] override physiology, perception, and behavior." Hypnosis has been stepping the line among quackery and treatment since around the eighteenth century, yet as of late, it has been getting steam as an elective treatment for some issue. What is entrancing, does it work, and assuming this is the case, how? We examine. Offer on Pinterest hypnosis genuine? Assuming this is the case, what does it do? Since the eighteenth century, trance has been encompassed by an atmosphere of a secret. As the creators clarify, spellbinding includes two principle components: induction and proposals. Sleep inducing acceptance is the primary proposal conveyed during the procedure of hypnosis; however, what it should comprise of is as yet a matter of discussion. Proposals are normally communicated as suggestions that evoke involuntary Trusted Source reactions from the members, who don't accept they have a lot, or any, control (or office) over the circumstance. A few people are also progressively "suggestible" than others, and analysts have discovered that highly suggestible Trusted Source individuals are likelier to have a decreased feeling of the organization while under hypnosis. Hypnotic inducing suggestibility has been characterized as "the capacity to encounter recommended changes in physiology, sensations, feelings, thoughts, or behavior." Neuroimaging procedures have demonstrated that highly suggestible individuals display higher movement levels Trusted Source in the prefrontal cortex, front cingulate cortex, and parietal systems of the mind during various periods of trance. These are territories of the mind engaged with a scope of complex Capacities, including memory and perception rested Source, handling feelings, and task learning. However, the particular mind instruments engaged with hypnosis are as yet hazy. However, researchers are starting to sort out the neurocognitive profile of this procedure. Hypnosis and Cognition Numerous investigations interface trance explicitly to subjective procedures and depict it as "a wonder including mindful responsive fixation." Some proof focuses on the job of entrancing in controlling specific considerations. The connection between entrancing and conditions of consideration is reinforced by the consequences of past investigations, in which a hypnotic proposal was utilized to modify various types of recognition. For example, the recommendation has been utilized to induce agnosia, which is a state wherein the mind can see yet can't perceive different outside boosts. Different tests have utilized proposals to control visuospatial processing trusted Source, which is the capacity of the mind to distinguish questions in space and to perceive shapes. Such impacts have frequently made entrancing a showbiz fascination, and, when treated as a performer's stunt, it evokes giggling and excited gasps. However, the act of mesmerizing has every so often pulled in an alternate sort of consideration, when the tricks of beginner "hypnotists" have seemed to have sad results. Another loaded utilization of entrancing is that of hypnotic regression. "Therapeutic regression,” which is a strategy that professes to reveal an individual's quelled recollections regularly of early abuse and trauma has, in some cases, been utilized in hypnoanalysis, which is a type of analysis coordinating hypnosis methods. Some even guarantee that entrancing can accomplish previous existence relapse, uncovering memories from past lives. Existing examination recommends that hypnotic suggestion can be viable in instigating bogus memories and persuading people regarding the honesty of these invented memories. Such discoveries illuminate cases of past relapse and on the memories therefore recaptured. However, there is additionally studies Trusted Source that gets proof support of the case that hypnosis can improve memory, yet the degree of progress might be subject to singular desires. Uses of Hypnotherapy The potential held by mesmerizing for changing observation is also what makes it especially fitting as an integral drug approach. Hypnotherapy is right now utilized, both in the United States and in Europe, to mitigate a few ailments and to assist individuals let go of negative propensities that can seriously affect their health. A few cases where hypnotherapy has been discovered valuable include: Irritable entrails syndrome Trusted Source (IBS). Studies have recommended that entrancing can soothe IBS symptoms for the time being. However, long haul adequacy has not yet been definitively tried. Insomnia and rest issues. Hypnosis can oversee a sleeping disorder, bad dreams, and rest dread (which will, in general, influence kids between the ages of 7 and 12), just as some increasingly strange rest issues, for example, sleepwalking. Relaxation and self control recommendations are utilized to address these conditions. Migraine. Some exploration recommends that trance can be powerful in treating headaches and pressure migraines, and it may be a desirable elective treatment because of the absence of reactions. Clinical pain control. Trance can have pain relieving impacts on account of intense clinical pain, which generally implies torment coming about because of surgeries. A few investigations additionally demonstrate that entrancing may assist ladies with managing labor torment, however, supporting proof is mixed. Quitting smoking Trusted Source. The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health detail thinks about recommending that hypnotherapy may help individuals who need to quit any pretense of smoking, particularly whenever combined with different methods for treatment. However, for this situation, as well, supporting proof is mixed. Home Uses of Hypnotherapy Strategies Progressively, self hypnosis and procedures of the sleep inducing proposals have gotten steam as "life hacks." Hypnotherapists and news sources regularly show self trance methods as an easy route for accomplishing relaxation and boosting self assurance. Analysts recommend that for these simple methods to be powerful, significant levels of suggestibility are pointless, and here and there, they advise placing them into training as a method for enhancing expert treatments at home. Some astounding roads wherein hypnotic proposal has been utilized are kids' books. One book, brought about by an author with broad information on brain research, utilizes recommendation systems to get small kids to nod off without the additional whine. What Raz's examination shows is that routine examples impact our recognition. His subjects expected to peruse nonsense words, and in this way, the area of the mind that would have typically perceived the word BLUE didn't activate. That thought structures one fundamental explanation of how hypnosis functions so successfully. Our brains have highly implanted ongoing designing. And, these idea designs are created over lifetimes. Memories, suppositions, negative experiences, positive experiences they all assistance to shape and fortify these examples and beliefs. As such, what we hear, feel, see, and accept to be valid, isn't constantly right. Rather, our conscious thoughts, what we believe is valid, are shaped by persistently advancing mind organizes that translate tactile information. This is called top down preparing. In top down handling, the data spilling out of the top abrogates and informs lower level procedures. Here's a model: Say you see a red vehicle. Outwardly, your eye catches tactile information about the vehicle. This information is sent to higher mind handling levels, where the shape and shading are deciphered. At that point, this data goes to more advanced levels where the shading and shape assist us with recognizing the vehicle's make and model. The information streams up, and yet around multiple times, the measure of criticism streams down. This top down criticism, which is dictated by our oblivious thoughts, advises the cerebrum on how to decipher sensory information. And, this clarifies why hypnosis works. By superseding the top down procedures with new, increasingly supportive recommendations, subjects can see the world through new eyes. Take a look at the Stroop Effect. It's hard to state "red" when taking a look at the word BLUE because our brains naturally read the word blue before, we encode the shade of the ink. However, when we see the words to be babble, we're ready to sidestep the basic and answer the inquiry immediately. That is the way to defeating bad habits and accomplishing personal growth. We should get down to the main driver, our negative suppositions that are keeping the bad habit set up and override them with better, increasingly supportive data. In this way, you can conquer your mind's educated top down procedures; for example, at the point when you feel pressure, you hunger for sugar and supplant this intuition with an increasingly supportive reaction. Reframing Our Preconditioned Beliefs through Hypnosis Here's an incredible case of the intensity of our preconditioned convictions. A gathering of members was approached to take a wine trail. They were given two decisions: A glass of "costly" wine and another of reasonably evaluated wine. The reality of the situation was: Both glasses were a similar wine. Yet, members anticipated that the costly wine should taste better, and in this manner, they gave it a lot higher marks for taste. The recommendation was subtle — one was increasingly costly — yet it plainly shows how effectively a proposal is utilized to develop our observation. Shockingly, the basic personality isn't as responsive to the proposal. You hear a recommendation, and then you analyze and critique it. However, with hypnosis, we enable the psyche to more readily acknowledge proposals? In the profoundly loosened up condition of hypnosis, our psyches are increasingly helpless to proposal. We're ready to reframe our reasoning examples on account of two standards: Suggestion and disassociation. e Disassociation: While in a condition of hypnosis, the hypothesis is that the mind parts into two states, the hypnotized mind, and a hidden spectator. As it were, we can shut out our environment and sidestep existing top down reasoning (the concealed spectator). This engages us to make recommendations without addressing if the proposal coordinates our current musings. Furthermore, late cerebrum imaging research proposes that hypnosis can make mind associations that make this conceivable. e Suggestion: During entrancing, the hypnotized individual is coordinated to concentrate on a single thought or recommendation. Also, since you've arrived at the hypnosis work, you can sidestep your basic contemplations concerning the recommendations. That is one hypothesis of how hypnosis works; we arrive at a state wherein the psyche can take proposals without addressing them. Take a look at Dr. Raz's trial: The hypnosis subjects read exceptionally conspicuous words — BLUE, GREEN, and so on — as rubbish. That happened because the mind was allowed to follow up on the proposal without addressing why. At last, most of the time, tangible information coordinates our top down handling. We see a red vehicle, and our memories reveal to us how to translate and decipher what the vehicle is. Through hypnosis, we use the recommendation to prepare the brain to react in an unexpected way to make another reality, wherein, more beneficial, progressively accommodating reactions are activated by tangible information. Consequently, when you experience pressure, your current top down considerations may encourage you to go after a cigarette, or gorge on sugary nourishments, or remain conscious around evening time — trance enables us to refresh and reframe these top down reactions. Different connections among hypnosis and reflection methods are additionally drawn by certain scientists. Certain studies Trusted Source recommends that contemplation and hypnosis are firmly related, as the two of them assume a job as a top priority body guideline. However, different specialists guarantee that hypnosis and mediations are independent procedures, as they depend on particular instruments. Hypnosis, they argue, is a procedure through which subjects "stunt" their very own perception, though mediation is a method for upgrading, as opposed to deceiving, awareness. Moreover, the way that the act of hypnosis has been around for over 200 years, a large number of its components stay strange. Its impacts may seem to verge on the extraordinary, yet the brain, as is frequently the situation holds the key. There may, at present, be some best approach; however, until we completely understand this captivating instrument called "hypnosis." Chapter 5 The Difference Between Persuasion and Manipulation any people fail to recognize the nuances between manipulation and persuasion. Despite the fact that both seek to convince someone else to do something else, they are quite different in enough key ways to be classified completely differently. One is only beneficial to the manipulator (manipulation) while the other ideally, should benefit both people. Because of these key differences, manipulation becomes far more insidious than persuasion. The manipulator sees the other person as a tool, a means to an end, whereas the persuader sees the other person as a partner. Defining Persuasion Though persuasion involves changing the mind of someone else, it is not necessarily a bad thing—there are plenty of ways that persuasion can be used innocently or benevolently. Persuasion is any method that will actively change the thoughts, emotions, actions, or attitudes of another person toward another person or thing. This change is seen as a persuasion. It can be done inwardly toward oneself through changing one’s own attitudes, or it can be done to other people as well. Usually, persuasion is used as a form of influence—it is everywhere. It is present in ads, politics, schools, professions, and just about everywhere you could think of. If you can think of something, chances are there is some sort of persuasive layer to it somewhere and somehow. When persuading someone, there are four key elements that must be present. These four elements are: e Someone who is doing the persuading e The message or the persuasion e A target recipient for the persuasion e A context that the persuasion is received Each of these four key elements must be present for something to be considered persuasive. Of course, this means that manipulation would fall within the category of persuasion as well. Defining Manipulation In psychology, manipulation is a type of influence or persuasion, but unlike regular persuasion, manipulation is covert, deceptive, or underhanded. This means that, unlike regular persuasion, which seeks to be most honest, manipulation is often untrustworthy. The manipulator will have no qualms about lying about the situation or attempting to coerce the target into believing something, so long as he gets what he wants. The manipulator seeks only to further serve himself—he does not care about the target and does not care about hurting the target. The target is seen as little more than collateral damage—a necessary sacrifice to get the desired results. As such, manipulation tactics are oftentimes quite exploitative and are almost always meant to be insidious and harmful. Successful manipulation requires three key concepts to happen. These three are: e Concealing the intentions and behaviors while remaining friendly upfront e Understanding the ways, the victim or target is vulnerable and using those vulnerabilities to the advantage of the manipulator e Being ruthless enough to not care about the harm caused to the victim Manipulation can take several different forms, but most of them follow the pattern of being covert, harmful, and causing no guilt to the manipulator. Key Differences Ultimately, persuasion and manipulation are quite similar: They are both forms of social influence, but that is where the similarities end. While persuasion is generally positive, even within dark psychology, manipulation is not. Manipulation is harmful, ruthless, and insidious in every way, shape, and form. When you are trying to decide whether something is manipulative or persuasive, there are a few questions you can ask yourself to decide. This simple test can allow you to analyze what you are doing and saying to ensure that you are making the choices that work best for you. If you are not looking to manipulate, but the questions tell you that you are erring on the side of manipulation, you know to tone it down a bit, lightening up on the manipulative factors. These questions are: e What is the intention that has led you to feel the need to convince the other person of something? e Are you being truthful about your intention and the process? e How does this benefit the other person? The persuader is going to be attempting to convince the other person from a good place—they intend to help the other person somehow. While they may benefit too, they are primarily looking out for the other person’s best interest. For example, you may try to convince someone to buy a specific car because it will work better for their family than the car that the person is currently looking at. This would be seen as persuasion—you are offering facts about the other car and showing how it would likely serve the person longer and better. On the other hand, the manipulator is not concerned with the needs of the other person—the manipulator is going to attempt to push for whatever benefits him or her the most. There is no good intention and there will likely not be much truth either. It is also not likely to benefit the other person much or at all, and may even be detrimental to the other person. For example, the manipulator may try to sell a car that is no good for the buyer simply because the other car may be worth more money and therefore net a much higher commission. The car is not likely to be very good for what the buyer needs, but that is not the manipulator’s concern. The manipulator would see that as something the buyer should know on his own and not bother pointing out the ways that the buyer may be making a bad decision, even if the manipulator knows the decision was wrong. Chapter 6 Ethical Persuasion ith persuasion and manipulation so closely related and really only differentiated in a few key ways, you may be wondering how to keep your own persuasion ethical. You may even be wondering why anyone would want to persuade, even ethically. There is a simple reason for this: Persuading others can oftentimes be quite beneficial to the other person, especially when you do so in order to better the other. Think of the best leader you may have ever encountered in your life. Perhaps it was a teacher that just had a way about him that always swayed people to behave. His very presence was enough to keep even the most troublesome students in line, even though those students rarely wanted to actually be in class. He could genuinely keep people involved in class and appeal to everyone, keeping even the students who would largely avoid actually learning in school engaged. He was able to do this through the persuasion of his own. Does this make the teacher a bad person? Not at all —he simply knew how best to deliver his messages to his targets, and in doing so, he was able to persuade those around him to pay attention. Ethical persuasion can be used in a wide range of situations. It can be used with your own children to keep them behaving well. It can be used at work to defuse stressful situations. It can be used to come to some sort of agreement with a spouse or friend. There are endless possibilities for ethical persuasion if you are willing to give it a chance. Defining Ethics Now for the boring part—Ethics. Many people hear the word and feel their brain instantly shut off simply due to the connection to philosophy. However, ethics are important in every context, even if you do not intend to use any of the skills you will be presented within this. Ethics, as simply put as possible, are the moral principles that guide everything we do. They are meant to govern the individual’s behaviors, ensuring that they are behaving in ways that are beneficial and respectful to those around them. Think of the golden rule you may have learned way back in kindergarten—treat others the way you want to be treated. That is ethics at its simplest. Importance of Ethics Despite how boring ethics may be, there is no way to deny that they are important. Think of doctors and lawyers—they have strict codes of ethics that must be followed in order to make sure that proper client professional relationships are formed. While you may not be a doctor or a lawyer, you should still be striving to live an ethical life simply to feel as though you have not wronged anyone. When you are able to manage ethics, you are able to make sure that those around you have their basic needs met. By behaving ethically, you are ensuring that you are respecting those around you, while also fostering credibility between yourself and others. When you remain ethical, you are able to better your own relationships with other people. They will see you as a valuable ally and asset—someone who is always mindful of everyone else and not stepping on toes. This is perfect when developing personal relationships as well as developing professional relationships at work. Ethics can also aid in decision making—since they dictate a specific standard that should be followed, people are able to more quickly create snap decisions that will be responsible and capable of ensuring that others are cared for. Overall, when maintaining an ethical point of view, you are able to remain professional and reliable. Remaining Ethical While it may seem difficult to juggle ethics when attempting to persuade someone else of something, there is a helpful anagram to help you: TARES. This stands for truthfulness, authenticity, respect, equity, and social responsibility. When you keep this in mind while attempting to persuade those around you, you will be better able to keep your own behavior in check. Remember, persuasion, in the right context, can be beneficial to everyone involved. It does not have to be avoided simply because it falls within the same category of social influences as manipulation. If done properly, persuasion is a powerful tool that will enable you to continue to act in an ethical manner while still persuading someone else to do what you see is right. Truthfulness When you are testing your persuasion and intent, start first with analyzing the truthfulness of what you are saying. You want to remain truthful and honest when attempting to persuade those around you for good reason— you want the other person to be informed. When remaining ethical, you should recognize the other person as being their own person with their own free will that deserves its own respect, just as you would want for yourself. You would not want someone else infringing upon your own free will, and as such, you should make it a point not to infringe on the free will of others either. When testing for truthfulness, ask yourself if what you have said is true. Beyond that, though, you must ask yourself if you have omitted any information that you felt would negatively influence the person or keep the person away from acting in the way you would prefer him or her to do so. You must make sure that you are truthful in your communication as well as in your lack of communication—make sure you leave no pertinent information out, regardless of whether the other person has asked about it or not. You want to make sure that the other person is as informed as possible because you want the other person to willingly agree to do what you are asking without coercion and without manipulation. Authenticity The next test for ethical persuasion is determining the authenticity of what is being presented. At a glance, this may seem similar to verifying truthfulness, but it goes a little further. In truthfulness, the important part was making sure that everything was accurate and reported wholly and truthfully. With authenticity, you are checking the veracity of the message you are trying to convey. You must ask yourself whether you are doing what you are doing with good intentions. This means that you are not stereotyping, generalizing, or using fear to scare the person into agreement with you. Ultimately, you must make sure that the message you are conveying is done for good reasons. An easy way to test for this is to ask if you would buy into what is being said if you were presented with just the information on its own. For example, if you are trying to persuade someone to buy a car and you were in that person’s situation, such as trying to buy a family car that will fit three car seats, would you take the message that you are presenting as honest, authentic, and trustworthy? If you feel as though you would agree with the reasoning being provided, the message is likely authentic. If you think that you may have a problem with the information presented, you should probably reevaluate the situation and your own behavior and words to make sure you are lining your persuasion up with ethics. Respect Next, you want to evaluate to make sure you are acting and persuading with respect. Are you recognizing the individual needs of the person you are attempting to persuade? Is what you are saying something that you would be comfortable announcing to other people as well, or would you be embarrassed or ashamed to be trying to persuade a perfect stranger of the message you are delivering? For example, if you are attempting to persuade someone to buy a minivan, are you appealing to some sort of gender stereotype, or are you genuinely offering up the benefits a van has to offer completely neutrally, such as discussing how spacious the seats are and how nice it is to have doors that slide open instead of swinging open when you are trying to keep track of kids. If you feel that your message hinges upon something stereotypical in any way, or is not tailored to the individual you are attempting to target with your persuasion, you should probably look into ways you can change the message. You want to make sure that what you are attempting to persuade the other person is not offensive, nor is it done in an offensive manner. You should not, for example, say that the other person must not be educated because they are from a specific minority that has a lower rate of higher education and that because of that, they likely want this one specific car that many lower educated minorities ask for. That would not be appropriate in this situation—it does not respect the individual as a person and is not respectful in general. Avoid the stereotypes and seek to really get to know and understand the individual you are helping in order to ensure that the information you present is as relevant, respectful, and persuasive as possible. Equity The fourth step in analyzing your persuasion, then, is equity. When you are attempting to make sure that your message is equitable, you are seeking to ensure that both you and the other person are on an even playing field. This is incredibly important—you are not looking to lead by coercion or through playing upon the other person’s ignorance. You should seek to make sure that when trying to persuade the other person, you are offering up as much information as possible to ensure that he or she feels that an informed decision is possible. Oftentimes, when people attempt to persuade others, they play off of a lack of information. When someone is misinformed, it is much easier to take advantage of that misinformation. For example, if someone came in for medical treatment and asked for something that was far more expensive and far more than the person actually needed, it would be unethical for the doctor to accept that without ever discussing less invasive options that would be appropriate for treatment. You want to do the same with your persuasion. Back to the example of the car salesperson, if you have someone coming in to trade in his car because he has hit 100,000 miles and the person has always heard that after 100,000 miles, the car is no longer reliable and needs to be replaced. As a salesperson, you may have thought that it would be the perfect opportunity to get in an extra sale, but as the conversation continues, you learn that the person is not in a good place to get a new car, but felt that he had to do so simply because of the mileage, even though everything was working properly. It would be unethical of you not to point out the information that you know would keep the person from buying the car because not pointing that out would simply be taking advantage of his lack of information on the topic. That is not equitable—the other person deserves an even playing field when making decisions, even if giving that information can cause the person to decide against what you are attempting to persuade him to do in the first place. Social Responsibility Finally, the last method to check for ethical persuasion is social responsibility. This is when you stop to see if your persuasion is beneficial advice as a whole. If it is not, how can you change how you are persuading to ensure that you are doing so in a way that protects those who may be at a disadvantage? Remember, the point of persuasion is to convince people to do things on their own—it is not intended to be harmful to other people, nor should it be causing others distress. If your persuasion is generally a good thing and will not have negative implications to the world at large, for example, you are not persuading someone to think of something in a racially biased manner, and it has passed through all of the other steps, then your persuasion method is likely sound and you are free to move forward with it. If it failed anywhere along the way, you are likely going to want to make sure that you are working to make your persuasion methods more ethical. Remember, ethics are respectful. They treat people with basic human decency, something that everyone deserves. Chapter 7 Manipulators ith all this talk of persuasion and ethics, it is time to get your first real look at the darker side of dark psychology. This will focus on the minds of manipulators, really taking a closer look at the most common traits that manipulators share. Interestingly enough, many manipulators can be predicted simply by having a specific pattern to their behaviors. Despite the fact that they all come from different backgrounds, they often present quite similarly. You will stop and take a look at those common traits manipulators typically exert, you will learn about the dark triad, which is a particularly dangerous triad of behaviors that the worst, most dangerous manipulators possess, and some of the most commonly recognized behaviors of manipulators around you. This is essentially a crash course to recognizing and understanding a manipulator, providing you with all of the basics. Remember, with knowledge comes power, and with that power, you can protect yourself from succumbing to the insidious efforts of the manipulators, who seek nothing more than fulfilling their own selfish interests. Traits of Manipulators Manipulators typically follow a playbook, so to speak. They act in certain ways, seek out similar people as targets, and want similar things. These are some of the most common traits of manipulators, as well as examples of each of the behaviors and how each can be beneficial to the manipulator in hurting other people or seeking out what they want. As you read through this, you will begin to recognize all the ways that manipulators, particularly those who hit the dark triad, are missing many of the traits that make us fundamentally human, such as a lack of empathy. Egotistic Oftentimes, manipulators are so busy looking at themselves, their achievements, and their goals, that they refuse to acknowledge that those around them may also have goals of their own that they would like to achieve. The manipulator is far more concerned with his own selfish interest than ensuring that those around him will also be satisfied through life, and he will use those around him as a way to boost his own ego in various ways. For example, he may constantly put down a coworker who he sees as less than him simply because it makes his own ego feel better. Machiavellianism This is a belief that the ends will justify the means. These people are typically quite manipulative, believing that it is okay to tell people what they want to hear to get the right behaviors and that ultimately the only difference between a criminal and an average person is that the criminal got caught. Those with this trait are often quite charming and charismatic to the untrained eye, but everything they do is manipulative. This is part of the dark triad Disengaged morally People who are able to disengage morally do not care about behaving ethically. They do not see those around them as worthy of respect or fair treatment and instead would rather get what they want without regard for the feelings of those around them. They do not care who they hurt or what they have to do—guilt does not occur, no matter what they do. For example, imagine someone who walks down the street and decides to steal a bike that a child left loosely in the yard. The person who is morally disengaged does not care that he has just stolen from a child—it does not matter to him at all. He does not feel bad about the behavior. Narcissism Another of the dark triad, narcissists are people who have a narcissistic personality disorder. They typically meet three key criteria: They have delusions of grandeur, constantly have a need to be the center of attention, and lack the ability to feel empathy. Narcissists frequently manipulate other people into either believing their superiority that they believe is inherent, or they manipulate others to inundate them with admiration and attention to keep their egos happy. For example, the narcissist is likely to exaggerate about achievements to make people more likely to admire him. Entitlement Oftentimes, those who are manipulators believe that they are superior to others. This entitlement needs no evidence to them—they are happy to assert this as true no matter what, and it is up to the rest of the world to prove them wrong. They believe that they are better than others, and that is used as a justification for the manipulation. Since they are clearly superior, they should obviously be the ones making decisions for the rest of the peons who are clearly unable to think properly for themselves. Psychopathy Psychopaths see no reason to behave in a kind, ethical manner because they do not feel empathy. They see no need to pander to the feelings of others when they do not understand the feelings of others. They are also quite impulsive, oftentimes choosing to act upon behaviors that are dangerous or destructive simply because they can. They will manipulate others to get what they want because they are missing the social cues from empathy that would otherwise keep them from doing so. For example, a psychopath may decide he wants something a family member has and pull all the strings attempting to get it, starting out covertly and ultimately threatening the other person with physical harm if it is not given to him. Sadism Those who exhibit sadism enjoy hurting other people. Physical or mental, it does not matter—either is enjoyable for the sadist. These people will manipulate others just for the fun of it, enjoying watching the fallout after the fact. For example, someone who constantly causes problems between friends, telling one friend one thing while telling the other friend the opposite just to cause problems and watch the fallout could be a sadist. Selfishness Oftentimes, manipulators are doing so because they desire to increase their own position in the world with no regards to how it will impact those around them. They see other people as little more than rungs on a ladder to climb up, and because of that, they can justify the manipulation. They are willing to lie to someone to make them fail in order to ensure they get a better job or do better in an interview. So long as the lies and manipulation benefit the selfish manipulator in some way, he is happy to do so. Spitefulness Sometimes, those who are manipulating others do so because they felt the person, they are attempting to manipulate wronged them first. They see the other person as the one at fault and act as such. Even if the manipulation will hurt them in some way or make their situation worse somehow, they are happy to do so simply because they feel that getting back at the other person is worth it. For example, if you have decided to separate from your husband, he may then let the house fall into foreclosure, knowing you cannot pay for it on your own, even though it will absolutely hurt his credit as well. He sees that hit to his own credit and the fact he will lose his home as well as collateral damage. Dark Triad As you can see, there are several different traits that a manipulator can take on. However, the most dangerous, insidious combination of manipulative traits is the dark triad. The dark triad involves narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. These three traits combined create incredibly dangerous people who have been found to be more likely to commit crimes, create social problems, and are regularly destructive in organizations or companies, especially if they manage to get a leadership role of any kind. With the dark triad, people typically lack in empathy, compassion, and a willingness to cooperate. You may remember that all three of those traits are crucial to the survival of the species. People use empathy to communicate and engage in selfless behavior. They engage in compassion to ensure that everyone is taken care of. People use cooperation to foster bonds and make sure that groups like each other while also increasing the chances of survival. Those exhibiting the dark triad are missing the capacity for all of that, making them incredibly dangerous. They are unpredictable to most people, who would never imagine that someone would behave as callously or manipulatively as those who exhibit the dark triad. Because of that, those with the dark triad personality are able to sneak in undetected, suddenly wreak all the havoc they can, and then disappear without a trace, leaving those in his path confused and blindsided to what has happened. If you get involved with someone with the dark triad personality traits, he is likely to be incredibly manipulative with no regard to your own care, and he will be very callous. While he may have seemed great early on, it is little more than an act that is meant to allow him to get into good graces long enough to get what he wants. Recognizing a Manipulator Ultimately, understanding the traits of a manipulator can be incredibly beneficial, but understanding those traits does not protect you if you do not know how to recognize the actions of a manipulator. By learning what the biggest red flag behaviors are, you are more likely to catch on and recognize a manipulator in the act, which leaves you far less vulnerable to their antics and abuse. Manipulators typically share four common characteristics: They are masters at detecting weaknesses in others, they will use those weaknesses they detect against others, they will manipulate others to give something up that works for them, and they will continue to repeat this manipulation until they are stopped, and even then, they will likely continue for a while. When you are trying to identify whether you are dealing with a manipulator, look for these common signs. Acts of Power Manipulators always want power. Their desire to find more power is nearly insatiable—they want more and will do whatever it takes to get it. Because they are frequently in positions where they believe they are superior to others, they will repeatedly act out as such, seeking to push other people to obey them in order to prove they are superior. This is an act of power to them—they get what they want through manipulative methods. Too Good to Be True Manipulators oftentimes start out seeming perfect. This is for a good reason —if they showed their true colors early on, no one would want to put up with them. For this reason, when they are somewhere new, they will spend the time to set up a good rapport with the vast majority of the people around them. They do this several ways, with the most common being through sweet talking and love bombing. These tactics will be discussed in depth later, but are important to keep in mind now. In doing both of these, the manipulator will say exactly what those around him want to hear just to butter them up, and those around him will fall for it. Malignant Humor or Sarcasm Oftentimes, manipulators love to make jokes that are hurtful, and when called out, they tell the other person that it was only a joke. If you see someone constantly hurting others, laughing it off, and blaming the other person for being too serious, he or she may be a manipulator. This humor is seen as a way to show that the manipulator is superior, inflating his or her own ego while putting down the other person. Guilt Trips Oftentimes, manipulators will employ guilt trips as a tactic of choice. This is done in order to guilt the other person into submission, typically done with long sighs and talking about how disappointed they are that they didn’t get what they wanted. They may also use behaviors such as the silent treatment or through berating the other person for not being good enough in hopes of the guilt driving the other person to try better. Guilt trips with manipulators sometimes also involve threats of self harm or suicide, and while they are usually not serious, you should always contact authorities if someone comes to you with intentions of harming themselves or others. Loud Outbursts Oftentimes, manipulators turn aggressive when they feel like something did not work out as planned. Because they see themselves as superior and therefore, an authority in their own mind, they expect others to follow suit. When challenged or feeling as though no one is following through with their expectations, they often get loud and aggressive. This is not only a tantrum similar to what a child would do; it also serves to coerce and intimidate the other parties into submission. Chapter 8 Dark Psychology Defined sychology on its own is powerful—when you understand how people’s minds work, you understand the reasoning behind behaviors. You can see why people would react in the way they did, and also how to expect them to react. Dark psychology is no different— Dark psychology encompasses the study of the minds of those who are ruthless, exploitative, and manipulative. It looks at the minds of the people who are out there to get their own selfish interests met through any means necessary; narcissists, psychopaths, sadists, and other minds that have a tendency toward manipulation have been studied to see what makes them tick, why they do it, and more importantly, how they manage to get others to do exactly what they want. Dark psychology does not have to be evil, though there certainly are people who use it for that purpose. You can study it to protect yourself—when you understand how it works, you become less susceptible to it. You can use it in genuinely positive manners, such as using your skills in persuasion to benefit someone else. You can use it to get the results you want, or even to get better jobs and perform better socially. Just because people with dark personalities utilize the concepts within dark psychology for selfish uses does not mean you have to go down that same path yourself. Traits of Dark Psychology Dark psychology is somewhat unique compared to other schools of psychology, primarily in the fact that it looks solely at insidious behaviors. Its studies manipulation, persuasion, deception, coercion, mind control, and more. It seeks to delve into the minds of those with the darkest personalities, who want to harm others. These people that make up the central focus of dark psychology are described as evil. They do not care about the people around them, nor does the suffering of others bother them. It also assumes that we all have the potential to end up in that role—we all have a dark side somewhere within us, according to dark psychology, but not everyone chooses to behave that way. While that predatory behavior may lurk within everyone, very few actually want to act with it. Those who do act upon their dark impulses usually do so to meet some evolutionary, primary instinct. Humans have three: Sex, aggression, and self preservation. These are survival instincts that are necessary to appeal to survival. Like a pack of wolves, or other carnivorous animals, those who allow their dark sides to rule them hunt with some sort of purpose. They take steps to minimize their own risks, calculating out their moves, and making sure their targets will be easier to overpower. Ultimately, there are six key traits that follow with dark psychology: e It is universal—all humans have the potential for it e It looks at how people think and feel about their ability to prey upon others e It recognizes a spectrum of dark psychology—no two people’s behaviors are the same or as harmful e The spectrum depends on the level of evilness or inhumanity that the perpetrator exhibited in the negative actions e All people share an innate potential for violent, predatory behaviors e Awareness of dark psychology and its concepts allow for people to control those impulses while also recognizing that some of the behaviors spurred by dark psychology are evolutionarily developed for survival. Users of Dark Psychology Despite the insidious nature of dark psychology, plenty of people use it with far fewer evil intentions. Each category below has a different motivation for utilizing dark psychology, and many of the categories of people use them to better people rather than simply out of selfish desire. The key difference in terms of where it falls in the spectrum is understanding when to use it ethically and when to use it selfishly. Politicians Politicians have to be able to read those around them in order to present themselves in ways that are conducive to getting their way. They are able to control their vocal cues, their body language, and behave in ways that come across as confident and authoritative in order to get others to follow them. Their ability to understand human psychology allows them to directly convince others to vote for them or support their causes. Salespeople When your job hinges upon selling or convincing other people to sell, understanding how to be persuasive and convince people to listen to what you have to say is crucial. When you can sway others and encourage them to trust your judgment, you will better be able to maximize your own selling potential, ultimately benefitting you more. Religious leaders Ultimately, religious leaders want people to follow the rules of their religion. They seek a certain level of obedience and trust, which can be earned through understanding how other people perceive them. Through being able to manipulate their own body language and knowing how to word themselves and persuade others in the most effective manner, religious leaders find themselves far more capable of captivating their audiences and swaying them. Cults One of the far more insidious of the example on this list, cults utilize dark psychology and mind control to systematically gain complete and utter control over someone else. They understand the effects of their actions, slowly isolate their targets, and covertly change their mindsets and thoughts, creating perfect pawns that are trapped within their structures. Lawyers Especially in court, lawyers have to know how to present themselves. Especially since the court of law requires people to prove something beyond a doubt, the lawyers must be able to present themselves as thoroughly confident in what they are asserting if they hope to get the results they want. For example, an attorney seeking to prove the innocence of their client must be able to wholeheartedly convince others that he believes the innocence of his client, even if he may doubt the client as well. Narcissists Egotistical and self serving, narcissists also utilize dark psychology regularly to systematically browbeat their targets into submission and to achieve anything they may desire as a result. Through dark psychology, they are able to achieve great results, teaching people around them to respond, guilting them into submission, or even just mind controlling them after some time spent installing the right buttons. Chapter 9 How to Take Advantage of Time as a Manipulator f you will truly advance your skill as a manipulator, you must know how to prevent yourself from getting caught. Recovering yourself from getting caught is a skill all on its own, and when done right you can actually put yourself right back into the position of being able to manipulate the person all over again. Many people are unaware of the necessary action required if you get caught. The reality is that recovering yourself is easy, but it is also a delicate process. You have to be very intentional and specific about how you do it, or you may end up burying yourself further and making it impossible for you to recover. Then, you lose your trustworthiness and credibility and may even tarnish your reputation, further damaging your ability to manipulate anyone in the future. If you get caught, follow these steps. Stay in Control You have to start by staying in control of yourself. Do not allow nervousness or fear to translate into how you are expressing yourself. Keep your voice and body language strong and confident, even if you know that you have already been caught. Immediately switching into a defensive or nervous tone of voice and posture will result in you contradicting everything that you will say in the next step. This means that, no matter how well you say it, you will likely lose the trust and respect of the person that you are trying to manipulate. This will result in a complete failure and loss of your chance of effectively manipulating this person ever again. Staying in control may be hard, especially if you tend to be an expressive or nervous person. For that reason, you want to really take action on this step. Do not even let yourself switch into nervous mode. Instead, keep your posture very strong and true to what you have already been doing, maintain your tone of voice and your vocabulary, and stay completely in control of yourself. The best thing you can do is let the nervous thoughts out of your mind so that the panic does not take over. You can do this by releasing the idea that you are caught and instead believing that you are about to regain control through your self discipline. You are not caught. You are simply being questioned. You are only truly caught if the person walks away convinced that you are a manipulative person. Until that happens, you are still in control. Period. Completely Stop Trying The next step is to completely stop trying to manipulate this person. You need to pull back entirely on every single level. Do not use any intentional persuasion, attempt to relate to them, or any form of manipulative request on them at all. At this point, they will be looking for evidence that suggests that you truly are manipulating them. For now, all they have is a suspicion. Your job is to keep it as a suspicion so that you can get them off of your trail and convince them that you are not, in fact, manipulating them. Once you have entirely thrown the breaks on your attempts, you want to give in to what they are saying. Do not under any circumstances admit to manipulation. Never should you ever say “I agree,” “Yes I was,” or “You are right” to the fact that you are manipulating them. This immediately makes you guilty, and you cannot come back from that. Admitting directly to manipulating will not revive you or make it seem like you were at least being honest in the end. This is not what it will look like to your target. Instead, they will think that had they not caught you, you would have never admitted what you were doing, and you would have manipulated them all the way until the end. Which, of course, you would have. Instead of admitting to manipulating, you need to admit to understanding how they could think that. Period. You are never admitting to anything more than this. “Yes, I can see where you are coming from, but I assure you that is not what I was doing.” “I understand what you mean, and I see how it likely felt that way, I’m sorry that I made you feel that way.” Using admission to the illusion of manipulation but not to manipulation itself is a great way to apologize without pinning yourself as guilty. Then, because you admitted to understanding where they were coming from (and not to manipulation), they are more likely to begin to redevelop their trust in you again. Slowly Get Back on Track After you have admitted to understanding how your actions may have made them feel and you have apologized, you want to start slowly getting back on track with your manipulation. The key word here is slowly. You do not want to rush this. You already had them suspicious and skeptical about you once, you do not want to get to that place again. This time, you need to be extra cautious and make sure that you are extremely careful not to get them suspicious of you again. Coming back once is easy, coming back twice is tough, and coming back three times is impossible. You never want to go past the first come back. You should start by building relatability again. Share authentic stories, agree with the person you are talking to, and use this as an opportunity to rebuild the connection that you had going with you. As long as you do this effectively, it should not take long for you to rebuild the connection. Since you already had one prior to the accusation and the accusation was never affirmed as true, the person will likely find it easier to connect with you the second time around. Once you have built relatability and begun persuading again, you can then move on to an easy manipulation tactic. The best one when recovering from nearly being caught is the Starting Small strategy, as you can slowly request more and more of the person so that they get used to saying yes to you again. This also allows you to see how they respond to your requests so that you can easily gauge the size of the next request based on their response to the last one. Then, you can also determine exactly when to ask the big request so that it comes across as authentic and not manufactured. Remember, you don’t want to get them suspicious of you again, especially not on your big request. Seal the Deal Once you get to the point where you feel that everything is flowing back on track again and everything is running smoothly, you can get back to seal the deal. Carry on just as you would have had you never been accused, but stay very cautious along the way. Cover your trail, act authentically, and do not make it obvious that you are in any way manipulating them to agree with you. That way, you can easily seal the deal with them. The biggest key when you are manipulating someone is to refrain from dropping into “guilt mode.” You do not want to try to make them feel guilty, nor do you want to deny the person’s feelings. Trying to make the person feel guilty will make them look right, as we tend to become defensive when we are guilty of something ourselves. Saying things like “You really think that about me?” or “Do you really think I would do that?” or “I can’t believe you would say that about me!” or anything else that would try and place the blame on them makes it apparent that you are feeling guilty about something. They will immediately think that you are guilty of manipulating them and then they will lose trust in you. Denying what they are saying also won’t work. People do not like to have their feelings denied, and that is exactly what you are doing if you deny manipulating them. That is why when you admit to the situation you say “I admit that I understand why you might feel that way, I’m sorry.” You are admitting to respecting their feelings and validating that they have the right to feel however they are currently feeling. This assures them that you respect them and that you honor their feelings, thus immediately re establishing their trust in you. The difference between an immature and inappropriate response to being caught and a mature and proper response to being caught is that the immature and inappropriate response will keep you caught. Executing the mature and proper response will keep you undercover and allow you to carry on doing whatever it is that you were doing in the first place, only more secretive this time around! Chapter 10 Covert Emotional Manipulation overt emotional manipulation is very important to the art of dark psychology. Many of the tactics that are used with dark psychology are going to use this type of emotional manipulation, whether in part or completely. As you start to learn a bit more about the world of dark psychology and its different manifestations, you will soon start to see the signs of CEM. This is why it is so important to understand what CEM is exactly so that you can watch out for it in your daily life. Covert emotional manipulation, or CEM, is going to be an attempt by one person to try and influence the feelings and the thoughts of the other person in a way that is considered underhanded and that is undetected by the one who is being manipulated. Being able to break down each of the words that are in CEM is important to help you get a better idea on the foundations of this topic. Covert refers to the way that a manipulator is able to hide their intentions. They want to be able to hide the true nature of all their actions. Remember that not all types of influence and emotional manipulation will be categorized as covert. The victims of the type that is covert though will typically not realize they are being manipulated and will not be able to understand the way the manipulation is carried out. In some cases, they are not even able to look and figure out the motivation of their manipulator. This is why CEM is such a stealth bomber in the world of dark psychology. Its point is to avoid detection and defense until it is too late for the victim. The emotional side of the manipulator is going to be the specific focus of that manipulator. Other types of manipulation may include things like the willpower, beliefs, and behaviors of the other person. Many manipulators will focus on this area of influence as they are well aware that the emotions of the other person are key to the other aspects of their personality. Being able to manipulate the emotions of the other person is key. If a person has emotional control over the other person, then they are going to have full control over them. The final piece of CEM is manipulation. It is commonly thought that manipulation and influence are the same things. This is not true though. Manipulation is going to refer to the hidden and underhand process of influence that will take place outside the awareness of the one who is being controlled. The intention behind this compared to someone who has the intention to influence can be a big difference. With an influencer, they are going to go into this with the idea of “I want to help you make a decision that is good for you.” But with the manipulator, they have the thoughts of “I want to secretly control you in order to provide benefit to myself.” As you can see, both of these are quite a bit different, so understanding the intention behind any given behavior is going to be a large part in deciding whether the situation is covert emotional manipulation or not. Situation and Manipulations There are four main scenarios in which CEM is able to take place. These include the family, romantic, personal, and professional parts of your life. One of the most common forms of CEM is romantic, and it can sometimes be the most deadly. There are some less obvious forms of CEM that you are able to find anywhere, and because they are less common, they can sometimes be the most dangerous. A good example of CEM is a controlling romantic partner. If a woman is in a relationship and her partner is trying to control her, she is going to be disgusted by what is going on, once she figures it out. She may want to find a way to get out of the situation. Because of this, many times the controlling partner is going to exercise their influence as covertly as possible. They don’t want their partner to know they are being controlled, or the victim leaves, and there is no one left to control. If the manipulator is successful, then their wife or their girlfriend will continue to be a victim of emotional manipulation, and they may have a hard time realizing that it is going on. This allows the manipulator to keep the control that they want without any risk of being discovered and losing the other person for good. This can also happen with a friend who would use CEM in order to get the outcomes they want when they have a relationship with another person. In this group, one of the common types of manipulators is going to be someone who covertly induced feelings of obligation, sympathy, and guilt in a friend. The friend is being manipulated in this way without being aware that they are being influenced. They may realize that they are behaving in a different way to that friend, but they won’t be able to explain why and how. You will find that the professional part of your life can be another place for covert emotional manipulators. There are a lot of people who have worked for a boss or another person who had authority, who seems to trigger some unknown feelings of duty, fear, and guilt in them. People who are manipulated this way may never be able to identify why these feelings exist or where they come from. And in the world of CEM, the family can be the most problematic. A skilled manipulator is able to find a victim, even within their own family, and the amount of influence that they exercise can be dangerous. This is because the manipulator and the victim will have a very deep connection together because they are related. When blood relations are added in, the amount of influence and control can increase quite a bit. The reason that these family situations are so suited to using CEM is that most people already feel a level of social obligation in order to help their own family. They are willing to go a little further to ensure the needs of their family are attended to. Because of this predisposition, covert emotional manipulative practices will give you a victim that is very malleable. Some Common Covert Manipulation Methods We have spent some time talking about what covert manipulation is all about and how it can be used to benefit the manipulator. Now it is time to look at a few of the different methods that can be used in covert manipulation. These are meant to bring out feelings of guilt, sadness, or something else. The manipulator also wants to make sure that they can do all of this without the victim detecting them if at all possible. Let’s take a look at some of the techniques that are used by people practicing CEM. Love Bombing Love bombing is a technique that many emotional manipulators will use when they get started with their interactions with their victim. It is going to involve an intense, sudden, and forceful display of lots of positive feelings to a victim. This may seem a bit counterintuitive in the beginning when we are talking about CEM. If the manipulator is trying to cause harm to someone, why would they work to intensify the positivity in the beginning? It’s because doing this can serve their own objectives. The idea behind working with love bombing is that it is going to create an intense feeling of affection, trust, and compliance from the victim over to their manipulator. The extent of which love bombing is going to be used, and the person it is used on, will often depend on how the manipulator assesses the situation. A victim who seems lonely, seeking support, comfort, and desperate is more likely to be love bombed and at a higher intensity than others. If the victim is more grounded, then they will need a less intense, and maybe more subtle, way in the love bombing. Reinforcement: A CEM Stacked Sequence After the love bombing, a pattern of intermittent positive reinforcement is going to show up. This is a way of controlling the victim without them really knowing what is going on. The typical sequence of a CEM scenario is going to involve love bombing, then positive reinforcement, and then intermittent positive reinforcement. Let’s take a look at how this is done and how it benefits the manipulator. Love bombing is going to be the unconditional, unearned, and intense display of positivity that comes from a manipulator to their target. This is going to happen right when the two meet and start interacting with each other. The purpose of this is to help soften up the defenses of the victim and can make the victim more reliant on the person who is manipulating them. This helps set the frame of a positive friendship, relationship, or another form that this interaction takes. After love bombing has occurred early in the relationship, it is time for the manipulator to move over to positive reinforcement. This is when the manipulator is going to switch their behavior, and they will no longer show unconditional positivity to the victim. Instead, the manipulator is going to withhold any positivity until the victim is performing the behavior that they desire. A good example of this is when the manipulator wants to make sure that the victim calls them on a regular basis. The manipulator is only going to show a positive response when the victim does this. If the manipulator does this in a positive way, then the victim will be unaware that this positive attention is being used in a strategic manner against them. They will simply start to comply with the wishes of the manipulator because they want to experience those good feelings again. This type of predictable positive reinforcement, after it has been used for some time, is going to then be replaced by Intermittent Positive Reinforcement, which is also known as IPR. This IPR is going to involve withholding of expressions of positivity, even when the desired behavior is displayed. For example, let’s say that the manipulator wants their victim to offer to purchase them things. And when the victim complies, the manipulator is going to only reward this behavior with their positive response on occasion, and not all the time. This type of unpredictability is going to cause a deep, subconscious craving for the victim to want more positive attention. But the victim won’t even realize what is going on. They will chase that good reaction from the manipulator using any means that they can. The manipulator is going to win because they have their victim behaving in a specific way, and the victim will not really have an awareness of what they are doing or why they are doing it. Reality Denial One of the most terrifying things that a human can endure is the feeling that they are losing their own sanity. This is bad enough if it is explained by something that the victim can understand, such as a byproduct of stress in their lives. But this can be really unsettling if this insanity feeling is induced by the emotional manipulator. Reality denial is going to refer to a range of techniques used in CEM that have the purpose of destroying the sanity of the victim in order to serve the selfish aims. The ways that this takes place, and its impact, will vary based on the method that works the best for the manipulator. One of the main ideas of reality denial is that it happens gradually. If the manipulator tries to do it all at once, the victim is going to notice and will stay away. Because of this, the manipulator is unlikely to instantly aim to destroy the sanity of their victim right away. This type of outcome is almost impossible for you to achieve without being detected. Instead of doing this, a skilled manipulator is going to take a slower but steady approach. This means they are going to slowly erode at the sanity of the other person until that victim isn’t able to trust their own faculties. But how does the manipulator turn this reality denial process on? It is often going to start with a small scale undermining of the confidence of a victim in their own memory. The manipulator will then be able to engineer various situations where the victim will feel like they need to question their own recollection of events. They won’t know what is true and what isn’t any longer. Of course, during this process, the manipulator is going to ensure that the portrayal of what really happened is the one that seems the most credible to their victim. This process of slowly eroding the confidence of the victim is going to serve two purposes to the manipulator. First, it is going to reduce the amount of trust the victim has in their own powers of understanding and recall. Second, this trust will then be moved over to the manipulator. One thing to remember is that this transference of trust is never going to be that big of a deal in the transaction, especially in the beginning. When the manipulator gets started, it is simply going to look like they are the one who has a slightly better memory than the victim. The victim may even be thankful that they have someone around whose recollection they are actually able to rely on, rather than seeing this as a form of manipulation that is being used against them by the manipulator. Of course, this is going to start increasing over time as well. The covert emotional manipulator is going to start increasing the severity of the events that they want the victim to question. What may seem like a harmless and even insignificant situation, in the beginning, is going to amplify. It will eventually reach the point where the victim seems to lose all their own confidence in their cognitive powers and will question their own sanity. The part of this process that seems the most insidious most of the time is the fact that the victim is often going to start blaming their own mind for losing these abilities. A skilled manipulator is not going to be seen as the one who is pulling strings. Even though they are in charge of this slow demise in the sanity, they will never let their victim know what is going on behind the scenes. These different methods can often be used together. But the key is that they need to be done covertly. If the victim realizes what is going on, they will walk away and refuse to be influenced by the manipulator. But skilled manipulators are able to use the different techniques above in order to get the victim to behave in a certain way, and the victim usually doesn’t realize what is going on or why they feel a certain way. Chapter 11 Deception nderstanding what gives deception away is an essential part of learning how to become a good liar. You can lie through your teeth, but it will create more harm than good if you don’t know how to avoid detection. A good liar is able to act natural, but he is also prepared. He knows what to say and do when people try to detect his dishonesty. A good liar is also wise about lying. He thinks, why lie when he doesn’t have to? Lying takes a lot of effort. He knows that if he conserves that energy for when he really needs it, he will be a better liar on the rare occasions when he lies. He also knows that he will earn an honest reputation and won’t earn the mistrust of others. So here are some tips on how to become such a good liar that you could even fool an FBI interrogator, who is an expert at catching liars. Have a Reason Lying all the time is no way to become a good liar. Sure, practice makes perfect, but when you lie a lot, you run the risk of getting sloppy. You damage your honest reputation. If you are a known liar, no one will believe you. You’re more likely to get caught in lies in the future if people suspect that you lie about everything. It is far better to have an honest reputation, where people think that you a good person who never lies. Then people won’t have as much reason to suspect you of dishonesty. Of course, this means that you should be honest more than you should be dishonest. Save the lying for when you really need to lie. Basically, only lie when you have a good reason to. Weigh each situation in your head. What would the consequences of the truth be? You might make someone unhappy with the truth, but will that unhappiness go away? Is this something that other people can get over? Or will it ruin your reputation, your friendships, and more? If you have a lot to lose by telling the truth, still consider telling the truth. People will often forgive you for the truth. Lying makes things ten times worse. But if you absolutely cannot tell the truth, then you can consider lying. The more you need to lie, the more likely you are to pull it off. You stand to lose a lot and you have great motivation for lying. Therefore, you will do your best to tell a convincing lie. Rehearse Before you lie, it is best to organize your mind. Get things right so that when you tell your tale, you won’t mess up. First, determine your target. Who are you lying to and why? What story will make the most sense to this person and minimize your risk of getting caught? Know who you will be lying to in order to design the best lie possible. Second, think up a logical story. Fill in all gaps. Come up with lots of details to make your story believable. Think of questions or problems that others may bring up and come up with explanations. You may have to think fast but don’t let that get you nervous. This is a chance to be very creative. Next, practice your lie in your head so that you memorize it. That way, when you’re on the spot being interrogated, you are prepared with what to say. You won’t spend as much time scrambling to make up details on the spot and creating an incoherent story that gives away your deception. Watch Your Tenses Liars tend to mess up the tenses of their sentences when they are fabricating part of a story. When someone is reviewing true events that occurred in the past, they will naturally use the past tense. When they switch to a fabrication, their brain suddenly is in the present, trying to invent a story on the spot. Thus, they start using the present tense. Watching out for rapid and unexplained tense switches or jumps in conversation is a great way to spot if someone is being less than truthful. But you can also use this knowledge for your own excellent lying. Avoid detection by rehearsing your story beforehand and being careful to maintain the same tense. Tell the Truth as much as Possible Another great secret to lying well is to tell the truth...in a misleading way. The more truth that is in your lie, the easier it is for others to verify. You look more honest this way. You also can blame lapses in truth on faulty memory, should anyone find out about the bit of falsehood that you snuck in with the truth. Lying by Omission Lying by omission is one way to do this. You tell the truth, but leave out one key detail. However, you want to make sure that this detail is totally obscured. People know all about lying by omission. They will watch you for this. You need to have a good cover for the event that someone spots your omission. When you omit part of a story, make sure that there are no obvious holes. You want to make sure that the story connects. So, when you leave something out, the story overall is still cohesive. You can make up a few details to bridge the gap. Deliberate Misleading How you word things is also a great way to mislead people without outright lying. You can use certain phrasing that leads people to draw wrong conclusions on their own. If they ever find out the truth and confront you for lying, you can say, “But I told you the truth!” Really, you did. Deliberate misleading is a pretty advanced technique. Learning how to use language to purposefully mislead someone without getting caught is an art. But that’s why you’ve graduated to Dark Psychology 202, right? The art of misleading requires you to make others draw incorrect conclusions on their own. Offering just a few certain words can make someone believe something that you are not really saying. People tend to draw ideas from their own biases. Knowing someone’s bias helps you figure out what conclusions they are likely to draw based on the language you use. Here are a few examples that can show how misleading works. From there, you can build your own misleading tales when you need to. Someone asks you if a girl is your girlfriend. You like her so you don’t want him to hit on her, but meanwhile she isn’t yours. Instead of telling a direct lie that she is your girlfriend, you can just say, “We talk.” That’s so vague, but it means different things to different people. This guy will probably infer from it that you two have something going on. Your mother wants to know where you have been. You can tell her that you went to a friend’s house and then start talking about how your best friend Mark’s sister kept saying something funny. She will infer from this that you were probably at Mark’s house. In reality, you never told her whose house you were at. Your boss asks why a project isn’t moving forward. You honestly haven’t had time to get it done, but you don’t want to lose your job. So, you say: “Events have transpired that making moving forward difficult but I’m on it.” Your boss may guess that the events you speak of are hurdles that you encountered with the project. He won’t guess that really these events are just personal events that have prevented you from dedicating your full time to this project. True Details in a Lie When you lie, you can still include bits and pieces of the truth. Pepper your lie with truthful details as much as possible. The more truthful details you can include in your story, the better. You want to avoid fabricating as much as possible. This is good for two reasons: the first reason is that the fewer untruths you make up, the less you have to remember. Making things up takes some energy and effort, so it’s best to conserve that energy as much as possible. The second reason is that truthful details are verifiable. That makes it seem like you are telling the truth and nothing but the truth. You can tell someone that you were at a friend’s house. Then provide some real details about the house and the party that you heard through a friend. This makes it seem like you were actually there. False Confession Admitting to something embarrassing or revealing a secret can help confirm your innocence. You want to distract people and convince them of your innocence by claiming that you were doing something embarrassing and personal. You also build trust and create a false bond when you tell someone a secret. Let’s say you were in the wrong place at the wrong time. You don’t want to admit to what you were really doing, so you make up something else nefarious that is a little less terrible than what you were actually doing. So, you could say: “I was seeing my mistress” or “I was at the porn shop.” This embarrassing confession both explains why you were where you were and it makes others uncomfortable. They are less likely to press the line of questioning. They will also think that you are telling the truth, since the truth must have been hard for you to admit. Posture and Eye Contact Your physical moves are what usually give away your deception. Lying takes a lot of mental energy and emotional discomfort. This manifests in your eye contact, gestures, and movements. Physical clues that give away the fact that you are lying are usually called “tells”. Everyone has a tell. But if you want to avoid detection, you must never reveal your tell. First, let’s look at some of the common ways that liars act when they’re trying to deceive someone. Grooming: Excessive grooming indicates that a liar feels dirty or bad subconsciously. He makes up for this by grooming his facial hair, straightening his tie or clothes, cleaning his nails, or otherwise performing grooming gestures while talking. Organizing. Much like grooming, a liar feels disorganized when he lies. He attempts to make up for this by organizing the environment around him. He might straighten papers on the desk in front of him, for instance. Lack of Eye Contact. A liar who is afraid of giving away his deception won’t want to make direct eye contact. He will look anywhere but into your eyes. He may become overly focused on a point in the distance to allow him to stall as he thinks of a story, or he may look to his right as he uses his imagination to come up with something. Too Much Eye Contact. The reverse of this is the liar who makes too much eye contact to convince someone of his honesty. Too much or too little eye contact is never good. Try to make a normal amount. Stuttering. As he stalls for time to think of a lie, he will stutter and use lots of meaningless filler words. He might even mumble, so that it’s impossible to understand what he says. There are just his ways of stalling for time and making it difficult to hear what he has to say. e Fidgeting. Fidgeting denotes nervousness. A liar will fidget in his seat, pick at things, play with his hair, drum his fingers on the table, bite his lips, chew his nails, play with some small object like a paper clip, or some other nervous gesture. A good liar will be relaxed and calm. Believe Your Own Lie Why do people lie? Usually, people are inherently honest. But they will rapidly become dirty, rotten liars when they know that someone will disapprove of their actions. Keeping this in mind can help you become a better liar. Consider how you want to please someone. Then create a reality that would please that person. Believe in that reality. Strive to please them. This will motivate you to not only lie, but to lie well. The key to lying is to become comfortable with it. How can you do this? One way is to make yourself believe your own lie. This is the trick that pathological liars use. They literally create false realities in their minds to convince themselves that they aren’t lying. Then they tell their false stories with conviction, as if their stories are real. These ties into rehearsal. Rehearsing lies is essential to lying well. Rehearse your reality. Avoid Common Phrases A lot of people have common phrases that set off alarm bells. Learn these phrases so that you can avoid them. Here are some major ones. “Why would I lie?” “Would I ever lie to you?” “Have I ever lied to you before?” These defensive phrases are telltale signs that someone is lying, so avoid using them. A liar wants to convince someone that he or she is being honest. An honest person doesn’t have to do this. So, don’t dedicate too much time to convincing someone of your honesty. Rather, behave calmly, as if you are comfortable with the fact that you are telling the truth. People will be more likely to believe you. If you dedicate too much time to convincing someone that you are innocent, then you will provide a dead giveaway that you are lying. Getting super defensive or indignant when people don’t believe what you tell them is another form of subterfuge, where you are basically trying to distract from the lie. Don’t get too defensive or people will see red flags. Instead, act like your honor is everything to you and you are committed to convincing this person. How would you feel if you were actually being honest? Imagine that feeling and then channel it. Lying is a bit like acting. You want to act innocent and behave just as you would if you were being unfairly accused of lying. You might get adamant and emotional, but you’re not going to act like you’re offended. Convincing someone that you’re not lying would be your priority as an honest person. Don’t Be Evasive Liars are evasive of the truth. Therefore, they try to avoid answering questions. Their dodging of questions not only frustrated the person who is asking, but it gives away the fact that they are not comfortable with this conversation for some reason. Therefore, being direct makes you appear honest. There are many forms of deceptive evasion. The most common is changing the subject. A liar will want to get off of the uncomfortable subject for fear of giving away the fact that he is being dishonest. As a result, he wants to switch topics as rapidly as possible. Beat the average liar’s game by casually agreeing to remain on the subject. You don’t need to keep talking about it, but as long as the other person wants to talk about it, you can keep providing details and answering questions. A rapid subject change is always suspicious, so never does that. Another form of evasion is being very vague. A liar will be vague to avoid giving away too many details. Details can get messy. But if you choose to be direct and provide lots of details, you appear honest. You set people at ease. Don’t use vague language; stick to direct and clear terms. People will assume that a liar doesn’t speak so directly and tacitly. A common way that liars use vagueness is by using the passive tense. “The door got locked,” is something a liar would say. But now that you know better, you would say, “I locked the door.” Don’t try to escape responsibility with passive language. Other people can see right through that ploy. Liars will also use “softer” language to lessen the impact of what they did and ease the burden of their guilt. For instance, a liar might say, “The painting was taken,” rather than “The painting was stolen.” Stolen is a stronger word than taken so liars don’t want to use it. However, you can stay a step ahead of most liars and use the proper terms for what you are talking about. An evasive person will also try his very hardest to avoid talking about the situation that he is being dishonest about. He will do anything to dodge talking about it. Thus, he will try to evade answering questions by asking questions of his own, joking around, and otherwise trying to distract the interrogator. Distractions are one of the sneakiest forms of evasion. Staying on topic is a good way to establish the sense that you are telling the truth. One way to spot a liar is when he or she tries a little too hard to be non evasive and gets a little too involved. For instance, if there is an organizational investigation into a theft in the office, you can bet the person who screams the loudest about the theft is guilty. He or she thinks that by being very involved, he or she will seem innocent and will escape detection. But being too involved is very suspicious. You don’t want to be evasive, but you don’t want to be over involved. Strike a rather neutral balance. Chapter 12 How to Avoid Dark Emotional Persuasion nderstanding brain research is the way to understanding basic leadership forms. Frequently, what you ponder how choices are made and why transformations happen isn't so highly contrasting. Numerous individuals think a coherent contention with facts, figures, and item specs is the best (and just) course. Truly the mind is very emotional. A superior comprehension of how the cerebrum settles on choices and how emotional persuasion functions will assist you with improving transformations (and your main concern). To begin with, for what reason does emotional persuasion make a difference? You're not as in charge of your choices as you might suspect you seem to be. The uplifting news? Nor are your clients, and you can utilize that to further your potential benefit. We like to believe we're sensible individuals settling on logical choices, particularly with regards to how we go through our well deserved cash. Enter double procedure hypothesis, which expresses that there are two unique frameworks inside your mind: framework one and framework two. Framework one is your emotional processor. It's programmed and oblivious. Framework two is your logical processor. It's controlled and conscious, yet much slower. Framework two is effectively exhausted because it's moderate and requires your full core interest. The additional time you spend thinking fundamentally for the day, the less and less you'll see framework two spring up when it's a great opportunity to settle on a choice. Framework one, then again, is consistently near, which is the reason you may at first settle on an emotional choice and legitimize it later. System two doesn't prefer to think a choice was made absolutely upon feeling, so it defends the emotional choice afterward. For instance, suppose you purchased a costly garments thing on the web late around evening time following a long, hard day at work. By the following morning, framework two will probably have guaranteed you that the free sending and an up and coming occasion make the pricy buy consistent. Things being what they are, framework one is a tremendous factor in basic leadership, isn't that so? However, advertisers keep on speaking to framework two, the sensible processor, solely. Regardless of whether your item happens to be the most intelligent choice in your whole industry, there's a strong possibility your client's framework two will be exhausted at the time, making her default to framework one. Framework one and framework two work as a basic leadership group. In a perfect world, your store will convince the two frameworks; however, if you need to pick between the two, pick framework one since it doesn't get depleted. TL;DR? We're emotional individuals settling on, for the most part, emotional choices. It's an ideal opportunity to begin advancing as needs are and quit discounting emotional persuasion as tentative voodoo. The Most Effective Method to Get Emotional Persuasion Right Before you begin, there are a couple of more things you have to know. Feelings are precarious when all is said in done, let alone as a persuasion tool. Here's the manner by which to hit the nail on the head the first run through (save yourself the hard exercises). 1. Have a well characterized process. Feelings are messy and complex, which is the reason a characterized procedure to control you is much more basic than expected. You know the nuts and bolts, you've seen a few models, and however, it's insufficient. You have to realize how to apply emotional persuasion systems to your particular crowd. You'll see this procedure looks somewhat like the optimization and development process, yet with attention to emotional persuasion and subjective research (reviews, interviews, etc.): Picture Source The emphasis on subjective research enables you to become client driven rather than item determined, which is significant in light of the fact that what works for one store probably won't work for another. High valence, high excitement may be a bad decision for your store, for instance. Or, on the other hand, possibly simply how you actualized it will flounder. However, you're in the correct quadrant. Wiping out this vulnerability means leading subjective research. 2. Guarantee duplicate and configuration cooperate in an inspiring feeling. Emotional persuasion strategies can be separated into two classes: duplicate and structure. In a perfect world, the two work together to disclose to one firm story and bring out a specific feeling. Emotional persuasion in duplicate comes in two structures: feeling words and emotional narrating. Feeling words are also generally known as passionate trigger words. A few words are innately more passionate than others, so the particular words you select convey a great deal of importance. For instance: e Private or secret: which is a feeling word? e Fast or moment: What is a feeling word? e Happy or lighthearted: which is a feeling word? If you speculated mystery, moment, and lighthearted, you're correct. Here are some other feeling words you can utilize: . Serene (high valence, low arousal). . Uplifted (high valence, low arousal). . Unburdened (high valence, low arousal). . Light (high valence, low arousal). . Meditative (high valence, low arousal). . Centered (high valence, low arousal). . Bold (high valence, high arousal). . Brave (high valence, high arousal). Oo AN A a A WU N e . Eager (high valence, high arousal). 10. Daring (high valence, high arousal). 11. Dynamic (high valence, high arousal). 12. In the Zone (high valence, high arousal). 13. Vulnerable (low valence, low arousal). 14. Trapped (low valence, low arousal). 15. Threatened (low valence, low arousal). 16. Disempowered (low valence, low arousal). 17. Insecure (low valence, low arousal). 18. Paralyzed (low valence, low arousal). Presently, the fact of the matter isn't that a single word is going to soar your change rate. It's that a few words are bound to trigger feelings than others, which you can use to further your potential benefit. Attempt to sprinkle feeling words all through your duplicate. Keep in mind; these are simple models. The best feeling words will originate from your subjective research. Storytelling is another key segment of sincerely powerful duplicate. Have you at any point begun a film at home and felt constrained to watch it right through, even though you chose you loathed it 30 minutes in? Or then again read a book completely through, even though you quit getting a charge out of it on page 60? Studies have demonstrated that our minds are substantially more connected by narrating than realities. You can utilize narrating in various manners. Possibly you recount to an anecdote about how the item came to fruition. Or on the other hand, you recount to another client's tale about your item. Or on the other hand, you assist clients with envisioning their very own story with your item. It's up to you, yet a story is substantially more relatable than a brand. Consider motion pictures like getting out or Hidden Figures, which utilized storytelling and emotional persuasion to express what is on their mind. Or on the other hand, consider organizations that have constructed a faithful after gratitude to their bold hero, similar to Apple. Emotional persuasion in configuration comes in three structures: textual Style, shading, and pictures. e Are you acquainted with the possibility that it's not what you State, it's how you state it? On the web, text style is how. The textual style you pick is affecting the feelings of your guests, regardless of whether you understand it or not. e The Internet is no more interesting to the idea of shading brain science. An inconceivable 62 90% of a guest's underlying appraisal of your store depends on shading alone. 84.7% of shoppers in an investigation said that shading was the essential explanation they acquired something. Let's get straight to the point. However, it's not highly contrasting. For instance, yellow is viewed as an exceptionally happy coloring, correct? Yet, everything is logical, and coloring needs to work with other emotional structure factors, not the only one. e Arrows, hands, and eyes can be utilized to coordinate consideration. (One investigation found that hand drawn bolts do this best.) Facial expressions can be utilized to inspire feeling. (All things considered; one individual's feelings can trigger similar feelings in another person.) Contrast can cause to notice feeling words and pictures. The list goes on and on. Once more, what's significant here is that these elements cooperate. Duplicate and configuration can't work in storehouses; coloring alone isn't sufficient to sincerely convince, and so on. 3. Try not to set your sights excessively little. Since you need the entirety of the emotional persuasion systems to cooperate at the same time, you'll likely wind up with a variation that appears to be a lot of unique from your unique store. This is something to be thankful for. While you may be utilized to minor A/B tests, it bodes well to pull out all the stops for this situation. For instance, A/B testing the presence of a couple of feeling words or a catch shading change would be inconsequential. Rather, you need to test a new look and feel concentrated on summoning your ideal feeling. 4. Get an emotional baseline. How do your guests feel when they visit your site by and large? Investigate this during your subjective research stage with the goal that you can get a benchmark. For instance, somebody visiting an outside attire store may be feeling bold while somebody visiting a bank's site may be feeling focused. You need to bring out a particular feeling, isn't that so? You can't do that as successfully on the off chance that you don't understand the normal appearance feeling. For instance, suppose you're attempting to fulfill somebody. You may adopt an alternate strategy if they're feeling mad, if they're feeling sad, if they're feeling stressed, etc. Chapter 13 Dark Persuasion and Dark Persuasion Techniques ersuasion is an interesting topic. There are lots of persuasions that are considered just fine in society. They are acceptable, and even some people hold jobs where they will spend a lot of time trying to persuade others. Any attempt by one person to influence someone else to do some action can be persuasion. A salesperson at a car dealership is using persuasion because they try to persuade someone to purchase a new vehicle. This isn’t seen as something sinister or bad. The difference here is that this persuasion and other similar examples of persuasion benefit both parties. The car dealer makes a sale and some money, and the “victim” is going to get a new Vehicle. There are a lot of legitimate types of persuasion that aren’t considered part of dark psychology. The car dealer above is an example. If a negotiator uses their skills to persuade a terrorist to let their hostage go, this is a good form of persuasion. If you convince someone to come along to an event that they will enjoy, then this is a good form of persuasion. This type of persuasion is seen as positive persuasion. But then, what would count as dark persuasion? Understanding Dark Persuasion The first difference you will notice between positive and dark persuasion is the motive behind it. Positive persuasion is used in order to encourage someone to complete an action that isn’t going to cause them any harm. In some cases, such as with the negotiator saving a hostage, this persuasion can be used to help save lives. But with dark persuasion, there isn’t really any form of moral motive. The motive is usually amoral, and often immoral. If positive persuasion is understood as a way to help people help themselves, then dark persuasion is more of the process of making people act against their own self interest. Sometimes, people are going to do these actions begrudgingly, knowing that they are probably not making the right choice, but they do it because they are eager to stop the incessant persuasion efforts. In other cases, the best dark persuader is going to make their victim think that they acted wisely, but the victim is actually doing the opposite in that case. So, what are the motivations for someone who is a dark persuader? This is going to depend on the situation and the individual who is doing the persuading. Some people like to persuade their victims in order to serve their own self interests. Others are going to act through with the intention just to cause some harm to the other person. In some cases, the persuader is not going to really benefit from darkly persuading their victim, but they do so because they want to inflict pain on the other person. And still, others enjoy the control that this kind of persuasion gives to them. You will also find that the outcome you get from dark persuasion is going to differ from what happens with positive persuasion. With positive persuasion, you are going to get one of three scenarios including the following: e The benefit goes to the person who is being persuaded. e There is a win/win benefit for the persuaded and the persuader. e There is a mutual benefit for the person who is persuaded and a third party. All of these outcomes are good because they will involve a positive result for the person who is being persuaded. Sometimes, there will be others who benefit from these actions. But out of all three situations, the persuaded party is always going to benefit. With dark persuasion, the outcome is going to be very different. The persuader is the one who will always benefit when they exercise their need for influence or control. The one who is being persuaded often goes against what is in their self interest when they listen, and they are not going to benefit from all this dark persuasion. In addition, the most skilled dark persuaders are not only able to cause some harm to their victims while also benefiting themselves, but they could also end up harming others in the process. Unmasking the Dark Persuader At this point, you may be curious about who is using these dark methods of persuasion. Are there actually people out there who are interested in using this kind of persuasion and using it against others to cause harm? The main characteristics of a dark persuader are either an indifference toward or an inability to care about how persuasion is going to impact others. Such people who use this kind of persuasion are going to be often narcissistic and will see their own needs as more important than the needs of others. They may even be sociopathic and unable to grasp the idea of someone else’s emotions. Many times, this kind of dark persuasion is going to show up in a relationship. Often one but sometimes both partners are going to be inclined towards trying to use dark persuasion on each other. If these attempts are persistent and endure, then this type of relationship is going to be classified as psychologically abusive, and that is not healthy for the victim in that relationship. Often, they will not realize that there is something going on or that they are darkly persuaded until it is too late, and they are stuck there. There are many examples of using this kind of dark persuasion in a relationship. If one partner stops the other partner from taking a new job opportunity or doesn’t allow them to go out with friends, then this could be an example of dark persuasion. The dark persuader will work to convince the victim that they are acting in a way that is best for the relationship. In reality, the victim is going through a process that harms them and the relationship. Dark Persuasion Techniques to Be on the Lookout For After taking a look at the different types of persuasion and what they all mean, you may be able to see why dark persuasion is such a bad thing and can be harmful to the victim. Being able to recognize the different techniques that the manipulator may use can make it easier to understand when it is being used on you. So, how exactly is a dark persuader able to use this idea in order to carry out their wishes? There are a few different types of tactics that a dark manipulator is going to use, but some of the most common options include: The Long Con The first method that we are going to look at is the Long Con. This method is kind of slow and drawn out, but it can be really effective because it takes so long and is hard to recognize or even pinpoint when something went wrong. One of the main reasons that some people have the ability to resist persuasion is because they feel that they are being pressured by the other person, and this can make them back off. If they feel that there is a lack of rapport or trust with the person who is trying to persuade them, they will steer clear as well. The Long Con is so effective because they are able to overcome these main problems and give the persuader exactly what they want. The Long Con is going to involve the dark persuader to take their time, working to earn the trust of their victim. They are going to take some time to befriend the victim and make sure that their victim trusts and likes them. This is going to be achieved by the persuader with artificial rapport building, which sometimes seems excessive, and other techniques that will help to increase the comfort levels between the persuader and their victim. As soon as the persuader sees that the victim is properly readied psychologically, the persuader is going to begin their attempts. They may Start out with some insincere positive persuasion. The persuader is going to lead their victim into making a choice or doing some action that will actually benefit the persuader. This is going to serve the persuader in two ways. First, the victim starts to become used to persuasion by that persuader. The second is that the victim is going to start making that mental association between a positive outcome and the persuasion. The Long Con is going to take a long period of time to complete because the persuader doesn’t want to make it too obvious what they are doing. An example of this is a victim who is a recently widowed lady who is vulnerable because of her age and from their bereavement. After her loss, a man starts to befriend her. This man may be someone she knows from church or even a relative. He starts to spend more time with her, showing immense kindness and patience, and it doesn’t take too long for her guard to drop when he comes around. Then this man starts to carry out some smaller acts of positive persuasion that we talked about before. He may advise her of a better bank account to use or a better way to reduce any monthly bills. The victim is going to appreciate these efforts and the fact that the man is trying to help her, and she takes the advice. Over some time, the man then tries to use some dark persuasion. He may try to persuade her to let him invest some of her money. She obliges because of the positive persuasion that was used in the past. Of course, the man is going to work to take everything he can get from her. If the manipulator is skilled enough, she may feel that he actually tried to help her, but the money is lost because he just ran into some bad luck with the investment. This is how far dark persuasion can go. Graduality Often when we hear about acts of dark persuasion, it seems impossible and unbelievable. What they fail to realize is that this dark persuasion isn’t ever going to be a big or a sudden request that comes out of nowhere. Dark persuasion is more like a staircase. The dark persuader is never going to ask the victim to do something big and dramatic the first time they meet. Instead, they will have the victim take one step at a time. When the manipulator has the target only go one step at a time, the whole process seems like less of a big deal. Before the victim knows it, they have already gone a long way down, and the persuader isn’t likely to let them leave or come back up again. Let’s take an example of how this process is going to look in real life. Let’s say that there is a criminal who wanted to make it so that someone else committed the crimes for them. Gang bosses, cult leaders, and even Charles Manson did this exact same thing. This criminal wouldn’t dream of beginning the process by asking their victim to murder for them. This would send out a red flag, and no one in their right minds would willingly go out and kill for someone they barely know. Instead, the criminal would start out by having the victim do something small, like a petty crime, or simply hiding a weapon for them. Something that isn’t that big of a deal for the victim, at least in comparison. Over time, the acts that the manipulator is able to persuade their victim to do will become more severe. And since they did the smaller crimes, the persuader now has the unseen leverage of holding some of those smaller misdeeds over the victim, kind of like for blackmail. Before the victim knows it, they are going to feel like they are in too deep. They will then be persuaded to carry out some of the most shocking crimes. And often, by this point, they will do it because they feel like they have no other choice. Dark persuaders are going to be experts at using this graduality to help increase the severity of their persuasion over time. They know that no victim would be willing to jump the canyon or do the big crime or misdeed right away. So, the persuader works to build a bridge to get there. By the time the victim sees how far in they are, it is too late to turn back. Masking the True Intentions There are different methods that a persuader is able to use dark psychology in order to get the things that they want. Disguising their true desires is very important for them to be successful. The best persuaders can use this approach in a variety of ways, but the method they choose is often going to depend on the victim and the situation. One principle that is used by a persuader is the idea that many people are going to have a difficult time refusing two requests when they happen in a row. Let’s say that the persuader wants to get $200 from the victim, but they do not intend to repay the money. To start, the persuader may begin by saying that they need a loan for the amount of $1000. They may go into some details about the consequences to themselves if the persuader doesn’t come up with that kind of money sometime soon. It may happen that the victim feels some kind of guilt or compassion to the persuader, and they want to help. But $1000 is a lot of money, more than the victim is able to lend. From here, the persuader is going to lessen their request from $1000 down to $200, the amount that they wanted from the beginning. Of course, there is some kind of emotional reason for needing the money, and the victim feels like it is impossible to refuse this second request. They want to help out the persuader, and they feel bad for not giving in to the initial request when they were asked. In the end, the persuader gest the $200 they originally wanted, and the victim is not going to know what has taken place. Another type of technique that the persuader can use is known as reverse psychology. This can also help to mask the true intentions during the persuasion. Some people have a personality that is known as a boomerang. This means that they will refuse to go in the direction that they are thrown and instead will veer off into different directions. If the persuader knows someone who is more of a boomerang type, then they are able to identify a key weakness of that person. For example, let’s say that a persuader has a friend who is attempting to win over some girl they like. The persuader knows that the friend will use and then hurt that girl. The girl is currently torn between the malicious friend and an innocent third party. The persuader may try to steer the girl in the direction of the guy who is actually a good choice, knowing that she is going to go against this and end up going with the harmful friend. Leading Questions Another method of dark persuasion that can be used is known as leading questions. If you have ever had an encounter with a salesman that is skilled, verbal persuasion can be really impactful when it is deployed in careful and calibrated ways. One of the most powerful techniques that can be used verbally is leading questions. These leading questions are going to be any questions that are intended to trigger a specific response out of the victim. The persuader may ask the target something like “how bad do you think those people are?” This question is going to imply that the people the persuader is asking about are definitely bad to some extent. They could have chosen to ask a question that was non leading, such as “how do you feel about those people?” Dark persuaders are masters at using leading questions in a way that is hard to catch. If the victim ever begins to feel that they are being led, then they are going to resist, and it is hard to lead them or persuade them. If a persuader ever senses that their victim starts to catch what is happening, they will quit using that one and switch over to another one. They may come back to that tactic, but only when the victim has quieted down a bit and is more influenceable again. The Law of State Transference State is a concept that is going to take a look at the general mood someone is in. If someone is aligned with their deeds, words, and thoughts, then this is an example of a strong and congruent state. The law of state transference is going to involve the concept of someone who holds the balance of power in a situation and can then transfer their emotional state onto the other person they are interacting with. This can be a very powerful tool for the dark persuader to use against their victim. Initially, the influencer is going to force their own state to match the state that their target naturally has. If the target is sad, and they talk slowly, the influencer is going to make their own state follow this format. The point of this is to create a deep rapport with the target. After we get to this state match, the influencer is then going to alter their own state subtly and see if they have some compliance for the victim. Perhaps they will choose to speed up their own voice to see if the victim will speed up as well. Once the victim starts to show these signs of compliance, then this is an indication that the influencer is at the hook point. Conclusion e are not amidst the Cold War any longer, however brainwashing or persuasion maybe it's as yet captivating and even worthwhile for a few. Regardless of whether it's through online advertisements, Russian bots, or super secret governmental projects, control and mind pliability involve intrigue, and we are generally potential subjects. Consider it next time you give a "like". Big Brother is watching you. Would it be a good idea for us to consider situational obstacles and companion pressure types of mentally conditioning? If that were the situation, at that point everything and nothing would establish mind control. We have studies that enlighten procedures of transformation and conditioning. We have chronicled models that show what individuals do under impulse. The brainwashing clarification overlooks this social logical research. It infantilizes people by denying them individual organization and recommending that they are not liable for their activities. The word brainwashed is still casually used to depict somebody who holds solid thoughts that are improbable and are totally impervious to prove, good judgment, experience and rationale. Particularly when these thoughts created under outside impact for example books, TV programs, others or a strict association.