Chapter 1: The Dark Side of Psychology. What is Dark Psychology Dark Psychology versus Psychology The Dark Side of Psychology Chapter 2: The Dark Triad + 1, The Dark Tetrad of the Human Psyche What is the Dark ‘Triad Everyday Sadists The Culture of BDSM A Veiled Dark Tetrad? Recognizing Dark Triad Dark Triad Dirty Dozen Test Chapter 3: The Art of Manipulation Types of Emotional Manipulators Personality Traits in Victims Chapter 4: Mind Control — Your Ultimate Terror What is mind control Mind Control Techniques Modern Mind Control Techniques Chapter 5: The Art and Science of Persuasion Punishment Nagging Chapter 1: The Dark Side of Psychology The brain is the largest organ in the human body and the most complex in structure. The billions of nerves in the brain works together with the synapses that help controls body functions. However, the human brain maybe manipulated and controlled through the art and science of Dark Psychology. What is Dark Psychology According to Psychologist and forensic consultant Michael Nuccitelli, Psy. D, dark psychology is a combination of human consciousness construct and the study of human condition in relation to the psychological nature of humans to target others due to deviant psychopathic or psychopathological criminal intent. While many try to restrain this tendency, others chose to act on these impulses. He further added that the entire human race has the potential to victimize all living creatures. Dark Psychology explores the workings of deviant, cybercriminal and criminal minds. Dark Psychology versus Psychology Psychology, according to the American Psychological Association is the scientific study of our mind and behavior. It is a complex discipline, which deals with sub field of studies in various areas such as sports, health, clinical, social behavior, human development and cognitive processes. Dark psychology is psychological science and art of mind control and manipulation. It is a psychological phenomenon by which, individuals employ tactics as persuasion, coercion, motivation and manipulation to make other people do what they want. The Dark Side of Psychology Researchers have long established that every individual has a dark side in them but the problem lies on how you can control this dark side so as not to cause suffering and pain to others. The dark side of the human behavior exists in schools, politics, offices, and workplaces. The dark behavior range from oppression, greediness, intimidation, selfishness, bullying, and even killing. Dark psychology aims to gain control and power over individual and groups by employing coercion, persuasion, and manipulation tools even if these tools can harm their target. Leaders, politicians, lawyers, sociopaths, public speakers, sales people, and/or selfish people use manipulative tactics to gain control and power. Even your own parents may be unknowingly using dark psychology on you. Dark Psychology & Manipulation: Are You Using Them Unknowingly? If someone tells you that you are manipulative, you would probably react and say “No,” The truth is every individual is capable of being manipulative. From the time you were born, you have unknowingly been manipulating your parents. A baby cries when he or she wants attention from the parent. The baby gurgle with laughter, enticing the parent fall deeply in love with them. As you grow up the manipulation continues. You would have tantrums to get your own way and when you see it working, you continue this until you grew up. You tell little white lies as you cover up using the excuse that you do not wish to hurt them. While most individual are aware of using these dark tactics, others use it without being aware of it. Chapter 2: The Dark Triad + 1, The Dark Tetrad of the Human Psyche The Dark Triad refers to the three negative personality traits that has common malevolent features. These traits were termed by researchers Delroy Paulhus and Kevin Williams. A fourth dark trait joins the original dark triad. One of the darkest and highly volatile trait and the most complex. What is the Dark Triad Research conducted on the dark triad is usually used in applied psychology particularly in fields of clinical psychology, business management and law enforcement. Research showed that dark triad traits are distinct by concept but empirical evidence show it overlaps each other. In 1998, controversy sparked when it was claimed that the dark triad are interchangeable and not distinct. Delroy L. Paulhus contradicted this, inspiring a series of research on the dark triad. Paulhus and colleagues found enough personality, behavioral and cognitive differences in the traits to prove their claim that the triad are distinct but overlapping. They concluded that additional research is necessary to find out why and how they overlap. The original Dark Triad are: e Narcissists. Narcissists are egocentric, self promoters, braggarts; lacks empathy; sense of grandiose, entitlement and superiority. Many popular artists in the entertainment world have narcissist personality. e Machiavellians. Machiavellians are calculating, manipulative, duplicitous, amoral, callous, and subtle cheaters. Their focus is personal gain and self interest. Like Narcissists, it is always about “Me,” Most Machiavellians can manipulate you before you can even realize it. e Psychopaths. Psychopaths has the darkest personality among the triad. They embody both characteristics of Narcissists and Machiavellians. The difference is their lack of remorse and impulsive traits. They have little concern about others and could not care less about the harm they bring others. Everyday Sadists After giving enough evidence to show the distinct traits of the dark triad, Delroy Paulhus is once again challenging it. Together with his University of British Columbia colleague Erin Buckles and Daniel Jones from University of Texas in El Paso, they suggest the triad is not complete. They accept the legitimacy of the original dark triad but suggest that the true core of the dark side of human personality is not a triad but a tetrad. The missing trait: Sadism . To test if their hypotheses is correct, Paulhus, Buckles and Jones conducted a controlled laboratory test on 71 participants. The studies revealed that those whose score measures high on sadism seem to take pleasure in seeing others in pain to the extent of making extra effort to inflict hurt on others. They are not necessarily sexual deviants or serial killers but it gives them a sense of pleasure in inflicting or seeing someone in pain. Sadism has been added to the original dark triad to create the Dark Tetrad. The everyday sadists are just as callous as the other three, they are manipulative and impulsive as well but they differ in their enjoyment of inflicting cruelty and harm to others. Sadists often harm others through legitimate guise like initiation practices in the military or police. Domestic violence is a form of sadism where the aggressor manipulates the target into believing he inflicts harm out of love. Dominance and feeling of superiority prevails in a sadist. The Culture of BDSM A Veiled Dark Tetrad? BDSM stands for Bondage, Discipline, Dominance and Submission, Sadomasochism. When the works of Marquis de Sade went public, Sadism became synonymous with sexual fetishes. This is an unfortunate and inaccurate view according to scientists. A sadist craves cruelty. They find the act of inflicting hurt on others pleasurable, giving them an adrenalin rush they cannot find under normal circumstances. BDSM or Bondage, Domination, Sadism & Masochism for those who practice it is a lifestyle. A choice, where two consenting adults agree to dominate and be dominated. It is a role play where they use safe words to set the limits of the one being dominated. The role play includes inflicting pain by use of whips and other tools and often leads to sexual penetration. However, the question remains whether this is a psychological disorder or not. According to an article in Psychology Today, sexual sadism disorder is a paraphilic disorder. Paraphilia includes fantasies, interests, urges, preferences and behaviors that are sexual in nature and outside the norm. However, they only become symptoms of a disorder if acted upon in a manner where it can cause potential harm or distress to others or to oneself, most especially to others who did not give consent. In a nutshell, this is saying engaging in BDSM is not a sign of sexual sadism disorder as long as it is consensual and does not cause distress or harm to both parties. Recognizing Dark Triad Unfortunately, it is difficult to recognize people with these personalities. They are often charming, socially adept, and projects a good impression to the outside world. Some can even get good jobs because they do better in interviews than the average person due to their lack of nervousness and anxiety about other people’s opinion. However, some physical manifestations can give away the dark triad. Example, most narcissists are more conscious of their physical appearance. They tend to dress well, wear provocative clothes, wear make up or anything that would make them stand out and look physically attractive. Dark triads can conceal their true nature and would often appear as charming, sweet and loveable. Unless they are clinically evaluated, it will be difficult to spot them but some telltale clues like habitual lies, bullying, and lack of empathy are demonstrations that they may have one or more of the these dark traits. Dark Triad Dirty Dozen Test To measure and identify the dark triad, researchers and clinicians use a 12 item measuring scale system called the Dark Triad Dirty Dozen (DTDD). The DTDD was designed not to diagnose personality disorders but to set a standard score to measure the three dark traits simultaneously. There was no standard and concise test to measure the triad prior to the development of the DTDD. Researchers used different personality tests, which makes scoring difficult. In 2010, psychologists Peter K. Jonason and Gregory D. Webster developed DTDD. You can try the interactive version of the dark triad personality test online. Chapter 3: The Art of Manipulation The word manipulation exudes many negative connotations. However, did you know that manipulation could come in a guise that most people do not realized it is actually taking place? Advertising is one of the biggest manipulative guise you can find. Advertising influences the way you perceived things. Product brands employ advertising to influence consumer to switch to their brand by harnessing the powers of influencers like celebrities and other famous personalities. With the advent of social media, influencers extended to blog writers, critiques and other famous social media personalities. Social media personalities are not necessarily celebrities. Popularity is based on the “shares’ and “likes” of their social media pages. The more “likes” and “shares”, the wider the reach. Manipulation then may be defined as intentional attempt by a manipulator to change the target’s behavior through influence with a goal of gaining something in the interest of the manipulator. Types of Emotional Manipulators Emotional manipulation is one of the most effective form of manipulation employed. Here are the most common type of emotional manipulators: The Isolator Manipulator . This type of manipulator employs various kinds of manipulation to control and gain advantage towards their intended victim. The victim is usually someone dependent on them. They befriend the target, making them feel good by lying and telling them distorted versions of truth. At the same time forming an alliance with another group against the target telling them negative things about the unsuspecting target. This effectively isolates the target from other people and thus manipulator gains control of the target. Anger and the need to hurt the target emotionally is usually the motivating factor. The Powerful Victim Manipulator. This manipulator portrays being weak and helpless and always suffering from misfortune. They employ ego stroking and false compliments to gain control of the target. Often, the manipulator will compliment target over his good life and at the same time compare it with the bad things happening in his. This effectively makes the target feel that he is lucky and that he owes the manipulator something for having a better life. However, when their targets do not fall prey to their pretentions, they react to their targets with anger and nastiness. These types only think of themselves and do not care what their actions will affect others. The Masked Windbag. This manipulator has a need to be at the top, the need to be always number one. The style of the masked windbag is not to directly boast about himself but bring down others to lift himself up. He is aware he would be viewed negatively if he brags about himself so he adopts a strategy whereby he would complain about his achievements making the targets feel bad about themselves. He would compare subtly about his advantages over his target making them feel inferior. The masked windbag can complain being unable to wear a small size shirt knowing that the target wears a large or extra large size shirt. The Wolf in Disguise. This type believes that their attractive looks makes them superior to others. They are superficial and shallow and relies on their good looks to get anything they want. They use sex as a tool to gain control of their targets. Breaking up relationships and marriage means nothing to them and in fact, would even brag about it to others. The females portray themselves as “damsels in distress” to trap their targets, while the men would usually portray the “rejected good guy,” They are subtle about using their good looks to gain control. The One way Mirror. This manipulator thinks he is perfect and can do no wrong. They do not take responsibility of the consequences of their action. They blame others for their actions and behavior. They are not out to hurt their targets but rather to find someone to blame. Their usual statement is “Look what you made me do” and this makes the target feel guilty. The Bully. This type of manipulator uses intimidation to get his way. They bully their target to do what they want whenever they asked. Most of the time, they use their physical presence to instill fear through physical aggression or intimidating posture. They feel that it is their right to get what they want and when their intended targets oppose them; they react with aggression and even forced their targets to bend to their will. The Pretentious Innocent. They befriend their intended target to gain information and then slant facts into half truths. They distort the truth to make others perceive what they are saying as the truth about their targets. When confronted, they will appear to be tearful and innocent implying that they must have misunderstood the target’s words. The target would feel remorse and think that they were not clear enough. The Guilt Tripper. This type of manipulator is very common among couples. The manipulator uses guilt and shifts the blame on the target and away from him. A man confronted by his wife about his marital infidelities would deny his wrong doings and instead shift the blame on the wife by enumerating her faults. This undermines the wife’s confidence and make her doubt herself. This type of manipulator manipulates the emotions of the intended target by shifting the blame and thus controlling the target. Personality Traits in Victims There are no offenders if there are no targets. Manipulation does not always work but there are those easily manipulated. Why are others easily manipulated and why others are not? These personality traits are prone to targets of manipulation: : Mind Control — Your Ultimate Terror Mind Control may seem a far fetched idea in the 1950’s but today, it is a concept that is plausible and real. This is the same method employed by the Chinese on American soldiers during the Korean War however; the method was termed “brainwashing.” What is mind control Mind control revolves around the concept whereby actions and thoughts of a person is controlled and manipulated through external forces; attained by physical or psychological means and often includes breaking down the victim until they submit. Once broken down, it reduces the victim’s ability to rationally and independently, changing their beliefs, values and attitude. Mind Control Techniques There are various techniques employed to control one’s mind. Some techniques are used to leverage business, some for relationships, while others are used for daily interpersonal relationships. Here three of the top traditional techniques employed by ordinary people who wish to control another person’s mind. Isolation. This is the classic technique of mind control. The victim is isolated from family, loved ones, and friends. Social contact is limited to non existent. In some religious cults, isolation is usually done in a guise of private seminars in a secluded place. Isolation is also a technique used in domestic violence cases where the victim is not allowed to go out and socialize with family and friends. When they go out, their manipulator is usually with them. Isolation will keep the victim from any influence except those by the manipulator. Criticism. The manipulator instills a “you and me against the world” concept. They lead the victim to believe that everyone outside of the cocoon they are in is against them and only the manipulator has the power to protect the victim. Criticism maybe used as a tool in isolation. If the victim believes that everyone is against them, he or she tends to avoid others, thus effectively isolating themselves. Peer Pressure and Social Proof. Often, most people tend to believe that beliefs, actions and behaviors of others are correct and because majority is doing the same, it is justified. This often works when the intended victims have little faith and belief in themselves, unsure of what to do or how to act. The easiest way for them to feel they belong is to follow and do what the majority is doing. You may scoff off these techniques and would probably ask, who would fall for that but truth is, majority of people fall for it. Admit it or not everyone needs to feel a sense of belonging. Nobody wants to be alone. Often, you do not want to look like a sore thumb sticking out. Fatigue and sleep deprivation is another reason why someone can fall prey to mind control. Modern Mind Control Techniques With today’s technology, mind control is no longer just psychological. Although effects of advertising and propaganda can be reduced, the physical effects developed by military industrial complex is much harder to combat. Here are the top ten mind control techniques in the today’s modern world: 1. Use of Drugs. Most often, these drugs are addictive and the goal is to get you addictive enough to be able to control your mind. Some of the most dangerous drugs used to control the mind includes: e Amphetamine and Methamphetamine can drive a victim to reveal all his secrets. Amphetamine can cause cardiovascular damage. e Sodium Amytal lowers inhibitions allowing the user to talk freely about things buried behind his sub conscious, particularly painful memories he wish to hide or forget. e Ritalin is known as an anti depressant but what most do not know is that it is a powerful drug tool for interrogators because users are known to speak freely and truthfully. e Pipradrol works like amphetamine but without the side effect. The drug induces the user to “tell all” without being prompt. CIA in the 1950’s. Although there is no record of actual use, the drug instill enough fear to induce the victim to “spill the beans” just by threat alone. e Mescaline ; processed from peyote cactus serves as a hallucinogen similar to LSD. The Nazi’s used this in their experiments on mind control and later by the US Navy as a truth serum. However, the use of the drug was a failure. 2. Use of implants such as RFID. This small chip is often use as tracking device for lost items like products, kids, dogs and now introduced in the field of medicine. RFID implants and ingestible is now FDA approved and used as an identification system by Israeli army. 3. Use of gadgets. Computers, tablets, video games, smart devices are just some of the gadgets that have a massive impact on how people now view the world. Marketing content appeals to all three elements of persuasion to convince people to either switch to their brands or remain loyal to their brands. These gadgets when wired to the internet employ applications with subliminal messages that goes directly to the brain. 4. Use of Advertising. Media has been around for such a long time. Traditional marketing was done via print, TV and radio. With the advent of the internet, a new medium was added revolutionizing the way marketers use advertising. A good marketing content can hook potential customers and eventually lead to converts. 5. Use of neuroscience technology. Drones, nanobots, god helmet, robots; these are just of few technological advancements relating to the merging of man and machine. The concept is not new since there have been instances where robotics is use to augment a physical part of the body. What is scary is the thought of this technology merging with the brain. Think of Robocop in the real world. Other mind control methods include: e Persuasion e Covert Persuasion e Deception e Manipulation e Reverse Psychology e Brainwashing e Hypnosis These methods will be discussed in detail in the succeeding chapters. Chapter 5: The Art and Science of Persuasion Manipulation comes in many guises and one of the most subtle form of manipulation is persuasion. Persuasion is a legitimate way of influencing others. What is persuasion Persuasion is an honest way of taking control of the thinking and behavior of the intended victim. Aristotle gave four reasons why everyone should learn the art of persuasion: 1. Justice and truth are perfect; thus, the speaker is at fault if the case is lost 2. It is the best way to teach 3. An excellent rhetorician can argue both sides to fully understand the problem and all options 4. Nothing better you can use to defend yourself Elements of Persuasion The Greeks started the art of persuasion led by Aristotle. In the old days, trials were held in an Assembly and judgment was dependent on the persuasiveness of either defense or prosecutor. Speakers were trained on rhetoric and elocution. Greek Philosopher Aristotle defines rhetoric as “a combination of the science of logic and ethical branch of politics” following his three persuasive elements: Logos, Pathos and Ethos. Logos Logos appeals to logic, reasons, and words in your arguments. Logos employ facts, historical and literal analogies, statistics, citing experts and authorities on the subject of argument. In Logos, your words, reasons, Statistics, citing and analogies are like pieces of jigsaw puzzle that you can put together to construct a logical argument. Your succeeding argument should not contradict your first argument but instead re affirm and support your first argument. Ethos Ethos appeals to ethics. You need to establish your credibility and character; everything you are saying are true and you are not just spouting lies. To develop this by how you speak, what language to use, sound unbiased, using right grammar and syntax, choosing proper level of vocabulary. Learning elocution is a good way of developing ethos. Your pedigree and accomplishments are important factors to consider and you can introduce that without sounding boastful. Pathos The third element appeals to the emotions. In Pathos, invoking the sympathy of your audience is the most important part. You can inspire anger or draw pity from your audience through pathos. Develop pathos by using an emotional tone, through meaningful language, sharing stories and examples that evokes emotions and through implied meanings. Many lawyers employ these three elements to win over an argument. If they have mastered these three elements, they can easily win against their opponent. Modern Persuasion In ancient times, persuasion take form in debates and reasoned arguments. One can hire a sophist to argue for him. Today, persuasion appeals to masses through manipulation of basic human emotion. Just when you think that no persuasion tactic would work on you, but how many can actually say they haven’t been influenced by someone in one form or another. Just look around your home. How many things can you see you bought because you found them on sale? Why did you choose a particular brand for the clothes you wear, the food you eat or even the supplements you take? Methods of Persuasion Various methods of persuasion are often based on basic psychological theories. Persuasion is not just art; it is first and foremast a science. These theories play a huge role in the concept of persuasion. Some of these theories include: e Behavior Change Theory e Attribution Theory e Functional Theories e Cognitive Dissonance Theory e Social Judgement Theory Other psychology theories relating to persuasion are available online. Usage of Force Although force at times is use in persuasion, there is no scientific theory to support it. Its use is only to make demands. When demands are not met, some people employ force to get what they want. This strategy is more of a threat than persuasion because it leaves no option. Weapons of Influence In his book, Influence , Dr. Robert Cialdini listed six science based principles how to make people say yes. He based these principles according to numerous researches in the field psychology. 1. Principle of Reciprocity — Pay back what you receive. The factors to make it successful is by offering something so they feel indebted, make them feel special by offering them something exclusive, and make sure to personalize the offer. 2. Principle of Scarcity — Make things hard to come to make them look special. The principle is made successful based on the premises that what you offer is limited in number, available for a limited time, a unique offer, and there is a sense of clamor for it. . Principle of Authority — Use of a person in authority. Make your offer backed by a person of authority in that field. If you are offering a cream that fights pimples, follow this with a phrase, “research show”, or “according to leading experts”, or anyone who has experience and position of power in the field you are discussing. . Principle of Consistency — People like consistency because it is easier and safer to be consistent than face change. People tend to stay on a committed decision rather than change it. Use these three steps to leverage this principle 1) start by asking for a small action; 2) make them commit publicly; 3) reward them. . Principle of Liking — People tend to follow those they usually like. These people usually share the same beliefs and interest as them. The concept of “word of mouth” endorsement is inspired by this principle. Some businesses leverage this by using a referral program to attract more customers. . Principle of Consensus — Majority wins is the concept behind this principle. Most of often than not, people follow what others normally do. The need to belong is very important in people and if they know that others are doing it, they would normally follow. Persuasion Techniques There are various techniques you can use to persuade someone and convert him to your way of thinking or convince them to help you achieve your goal. Some use punishment, fear, rewards and many others. Below are some of the most effective persuasion techniques. Anchoring bias technique. This is a cognitive bias that is subtle yet powerful in its effect. This works by anchoring the first offer as your basis of decision. Example if you are buying a house, when the agent offers you a 20% cut on the price, you would often agree thinking that you saved 20% when in reality that is the real price of the house. The agent used a higher price as an anchor to hook you into paying the real sale price. Fundamental Need Technique. The technique appeals to your basic needs — food, shelter, love, self actualization and self esteem. How many times have you bought a product because it makes you feel good, young and beautiful? Or how about buying something because a popular person you like is endorsing it? Small Step to Giant Step Technique. The intended target is persuaded to commit into buying or doing something small. Once they have the commitment, it is easy to persuade the target to commit into something bigger. The reverse version of this technique works just as well. Scarcity Technique. When people think something is scarce or limited, the demand becomes higher. Marketers often use phrases “one day sale” or “limited stocks” to create scarcity. Chapter 6: Covert Persuasion Covert echniques You Might Fail To Notice As defined in the Merriam Webster dictionary, covert means veiled or not openly shown. Persuasion is a method used to change the belief, thinking and behavior of the intended victim without resorting to malicious means. What is Covert Persuasion? Covert persuasion are subtle persuasion techniques employed to change the target’s way of behaving and thinking. Most of the time, the target is not aware that persuasion technique is being used on them. Covert persuasion is intentional with the end goal of gaining power and control. Lies, guilt, denial, comparison, complaints, bribe, blames, evasiveness, blackmail, fake concern, sympathy, feigning innocence or ignorance, flattery, apologies, gifts and mind games are just a few of the tools manipulators use as weapons to control their targets without their knowledge. From No to Yes — Why People Say No A person’s instant reaction to questions is “No” and this is due to a past similar incident wherein they made a bad decision. In their book Covert Persuasion , authors Kevin Hogan and James Speakman say 90% of those who reply in the negative experienced a similar situation. Most people tend to remember marked experiences particularly bad ones and its end result. According to sales legend Tom Hopkins there are three conditions why people automatically say “No”, a) The information you gave is not clear to him b) It is not the right time and he needs more time to think over his decision c) Itis not the right moment or there is something keeping him from saying yes. Although persistence pays off, it does not give you license to pester the person. If they say no to you, instead of pestering the person, find out why he is giving a negative answer and move forward from there. Turning No to Yes Rejection is a bitter pill to swallow. Be it in love, personal life, work, or business. Take a salesperson’s sales pitch for example. Even the best sales pitch can yield a negative result, but there are ways you can turn around a “no” into a “yes,” This four step tactic can help you get your desired result. 1. Psyche yourself for a rejection. Do not let it get you down. If you do not take it personally, the rejection will not affect you much. Be prepared with a plan on how you will turn the “no” to a “yes,” 2. So, you received a No. Do not let it end there. When you received a negative answer, do not just give up. Find out why you received a rejection. Try to discover the reason behind it. Do not be content by being passive. 3. Be ready with a preemptive statement. Even before an objection is raised, start with a preemptive statement. You can control the discussion if you start with a preemptive statement and make them forget their objection. 4. Create new opportunities to get an eventual yes. If you have been turned down, find new opportunities that would allow them to say yes to you in the future. If you received a “no”, leave your business card or maybe give them some sort of inexpensive give to help them remember you in the future. These tactics can work not just in business or in sales. You can apply them in your personal life as well. Covert Strategies Covert persuasion is hidden and intentional as discussed earlier. Their aim is control you by putting you on a defensive and make you doubt yourself so that they can get what they want without being confronted, avoid responsibility, and hide their aggression. They employ various strategies to control their intended target. Some of their most typical strategies are: Chapter 7: Covert Emotional Manipulation actics Covert emotional manipulation tactics are among the worst anyone can suffer. The manipulator preys on the target’s emotion until hooked. The target does not realize it even if he or she is already feeling low, ashamed, lacks confidence and self esteem. It is difficult for the target to get out of this kind of manipulation because he or she does not realize it is happening. Here some of the most common tactics you can watch out: e Sharing is caring This tactic is popular in any relationships, be it business or personal. The manipulator will ask you probing questions and allow you to share more about yourself. The information you give allows the manipulator to control your decisions. Examples: “Oh I’ve heard he was not a good boss. How does he treat you?” “Tell me what happened. It will ease up your burden.” e Come into my realm Manipulators wants home court advantage. The feel more powerful being on their own turf. You are at a disadvantage since they claim ownership of that space. Examples: “Why don’t you meet me at the coffee shop across my office? You know your place is too far from me.” “You know I can’t drive that far. Let’s meet in my house instead.” e Distorted truths Manipulators are great at distorting truths. They can alter truths with lies, exaggeration, fibs, or omit information to distort reality. They exaggerate things that would make them look good and understate things that would put them in a bad light. Examples: “I was asking nicely and she screams at me saying I am incompetent. You know I’m right?” “I didn’t sleep a wink thinking about your problem. ” e Red Tape bullying The manipulator burdens the target with red tape, paperwork, procedures or other obstacles that can get in your way of doing things. This usually happens when you draw attention to their flaws by asking questions. Examples: “There is too much paper work involved. Do not bother yourself with it.” “You are just creating a headache for yourself.” e Intellectual syndrome This manipulator position themselves as experts and more knowledgeable than you. They will impose their “so called” knowledge on you making you look inferior. Examples: “T’ve been doing this a long time so you listen to me.” “I know you are new to this so let me explain it to your slowly.” e Your problem is small compared to mine The manipulator makes your issues feel insignificant compared to his. They always want to discuss their own issues to invalidate your emotions and let themselves be the focus. Examples: “You are lucky you have someone, I’ve been alone all my life.” “Are you kidding me? I deal with people like that every day.” e Worming his way out An expert manipulator never takes responsibility of their actions. What they do is turn it around so that it will become your fault and not theirs. Most of the time, you end up apologizing for his own faults. Examples: “I did for you to show you how much I love you.” “If you did not go with my Mother, you could have gone to your son’s football game.” e Playing the Martyr This manipulator makes false promises about helping the target and then make excuses to not follow through on his promise. He would make it appear that keeping his promise would be too much of a burden on him, making you feel guilty for asking help. Examples: “Oh dear, I have too much on my plate at the moment. I simply cannot make the time.” “I know you need my help but I simply cannot do it because I need to take the car for an oil check up.” e “Me too” Syndrome The manipulator does not allow you to take the spotlight. He should always be the center of attention. He would not allow his target to shine and would always find ways to be one up over the target. Examples: “Your presentation was great but I heard another Department Head “wowed” the CEO.” “Congratulations on your son’s award, my two children received the same last year.” e It’s just a joke The manipulator uses veiled sarcasm or jest saying critical remarks. In truth, their statements are designed to plant doubts in the mind of the target. The target perceives this as a joke or when confronted, the manipulator will claim it is just a joke. Examples: “If you avoid those delicious desserts, you won't feel shy about playing beach volleyball.” “Gosh, did you forget to wear make up?” e “Or else” Tactic The manipulator uses ultimatum to control the target. The manipulator uses dramatic statements meant to corner the target and leave the target with no choice but to give in. Often, the target ends up apologizing for causing the argument when it was not even his or her fault in the first place. Examples: “If you don’t work over time this weekend then you are not really interested in that promotion.” “If you leave me, then I have no reason to live.” e Silent treatment This is one of the most effective covert manipulation tactic. The manipulator will ignore the target and cut off all forms of communication. This will agitate and make the target feel worried and doubt herself. The waiting game is one of the hardest thing anyone can go through. e Confusing Denial Manipulators vehemently denies his statements making the target question his memory. Once target becomes confused, they turn around things and put blame on the target. Examples: “That’s not what I said. You must have heard it wrong.” “You know I would never agree to that. Have you forgotten I told you I’m busy that day?” e Opposite reaction Manipulators react opposite of their target’s reaction to make them feel sensitive, particularly during highly strung situations. This makes the target over exaggerating. The target would feel doubts and try to match the manipulator’s reaction to the situation so he or she would not look out of line. Examples: “Do not get too upset, everyone is calm.” “You know that your reaction is a little over the top compared with the others.” Chapter 8: Using Deception Another mind control method manipulators employ is deception or more commonly called lying. What is deception? Deception is a statement or act that hides the truth, misleads, or promotes a concept, idea or belief that is false often done to control or for personal gain. Deception also involves propaganda, dissimulation, camouflage, concealment, and distraction. Deceit occurs in all aspects of relationship, be it business, professional, personal or romantic. It can also be a basis for legal cases or lead to criminal prosecution in the form of fraud. Types of Deception Concealing truths and omitting information becomes a lie when it the intent is to deceive. Anyone can lie by omission or via outright false statements. Some forms of deception includes: e Lying. Issuing statements or giving statements and information, which is far from the truth. e Exaggerations. Stretching or overstating the truth especially if it will make the manipulator look good. e Understatements. Downplaying or minimizing some parts of the truth especially those that can put manipulator in a bad light. e Concealment. Omitting important information to distort the truth or lying by omission. e Untruthful. Misrepresentation of the truth. e Equivocations. Stating ambiguous, contradictory and indirect statements. Motives for Deception Everyone started lying from childhood. Little white lies seemed innocent. Kids do it to get out of trouble. According to psychologist Robert Feldman, “Lying has to do with self esteem. When self esteem gets threatened, people lie immediately at higher levels.” But why do people lie? Here are a few reasons why people lie: 1. People lie to fit in . Acceptance and love are important to people. People rely on acceptance of others to feel good. They would lie about their likes and dislikes, what food they eat, what music they listen to, and so many other things. Even if these things were far from the truth, they would lie about it just so they can fit in with everyone. 2. People lie to avoid consequences. Nobody wants to get in trouble. Lying is the easiest way to avoid consequences of their action. Lying is a convenient tool to avoid consequences. When faced with a sticky situation, lying is the easiest way to get out yourself out of it. 3. People lie to cover awkwardness. It goes with the territory of needing to fit in or to belong. When people feel they are at a disadvantage, they make up stories to make themselves stand out. They would lie about everything from their origins; their school, their job, their wealth, and everything else just to fit and feel a sense of belonging. 4. People lie to get ahead. People will do anything to be on top. This is common in offices and social circles. They would lie to get what they want, or get ahead when the opportunity arises. These people are opportunist who preys on the unsuspecting target. 5. People lie to make others look bad. This is a classic up one man ship. To do this, they would make the target look bad or inferior by either saying bad things about them or creating inferences that others may take into heart. 6. People lie to protect others. 7. Not all lies are intended to deceive. Some lies are done to protect others or a relationship. A husband can lie about meeting an ex to his wife so as not to hurt her feelings. A friend will lie about hour hideous dress because she doesn’t want to hurt you. While it is still deception, the main reason for it is to spare unnecessary pain and preserve the existing relationship. Based on these, you can categorize the reasons for lying in three general categories: 1. Instrumental — The lie helps to protect resources and avoid punishments 2. Relational — The lie helps to maintain bonds and relationships 3. Identity — The lie helps to save face or preserved image. Detecting Deception According to psychologist Paul Ekman, deception detection are investigative practices to determine one’s credibility and truthfulness. Detection is determined through certain physiological and behavioral cues as well as situational and contextual information. The Challenges of Detecting Deception The challenge of detecting deception is the lack of a definitive single sign of the deceit, no facial expression, and twitch of muscle or gesture to prove the person is lying with certainty. Most methods to detect deception today relies on various methods in collecting, analyzing, and interpreting physiological and emotional data. Although, collected data may show emotional clues that may or may not be linked with deception. In his handbook, Mark Frank proposed; you can detect deception at the cognitive level. Lying is a conscious behavior; you need to watch the body language and listen to their speech to help you detect the lies. Watch for responses; if they include repeated words, less talking time, and poor logical structure of statements, the person may be lying. You can also factor in variation and frequency height in vocal cues. Main Components of Deception: Camouflage, Disguise, Simulation Deception is not complete without these three elements: Camouflage Normally, camouflage is use to break up the visual boundary of an object. This involves creating a background that is the same as the color of the camouflaged object or in military wear clothes or items to blend themselves against the background. Manipulators uses half truths or hides information to camouflage the truth. Disguise For famous people, disguise is also known as incognito. People alter their appearance via clothes, make up, and other items they can use to hide their identity. Some can alter their manner of speech to disguise themselves. For manipulators disguise comes in the form of propaganda. They issue proposals that hides its true goal or agenda. Example disguising kidnapping by using the word “protective custody,” Simulation Simulation is imitating an operation or process to see or evaluate the outcome. There are three simulation techniques fabrication, mimicry and distraction. Fabrication is creating something to make it appear like another thing that is actually not. One of the most well known fabrication is the Trojan horse during the Trojan War. Mimicry is similar to camouflage where an object appears the same as another object. A whale may appear like a small island in the middle of water and you will not notice it until it starts moving. Distraction involves giving out information that is opposite of what would actually be done to distract or lead others away from his actual plan. Example, telling her friend that she will wear same color of dress as hers but will wear a different color so she would stand out. Deception Techniques Misinformation Misinformation is creating or inventing false information with the intention to mislead or deceive. The information is usually exaggerated to make it seem or important. The main goal is to diminish its quality and reduce credibility. Often done publicly to ridicule and humiliate the target. A tactic employed to confuse and divert attention over the real issue, create dissent or deliberately use ambiguity to mislead or deceive. Omission This technique is the most pervasive, most insidious and most common form perpetuated. Those who usually employ this technique believes it is not lying if you don’t say anything. This creates a false impression to promote something, which is not true. A high school teen may inform her mother that she is attending a birthday party but not say that the party is for college students. Derailing The manipulator will suddenly switch topics to avoid being cornered with the truth. He or she might pretend offended to take away attention from him or her. This works both ways as the manipulator is egocentric enough to derail conversation to become the focus of attention. Chapter 9: Psychological Manipulation The next mind control method in our list is manipulation, which was initially discussed in Chapter 3. What is manipulation As described in Chapter 3 manipulation is an intentional attempt to change a target’s behavior through influence to gain something. We discussed emotional manipulation in Chapter 3; in this Chapter, we will discuss another form of manipulation — psychological manipulation. Psychological manipulation is a form of social influence with the aim of changing the perception or behavior of others by using deceptive, underhanded or indirect tactics. If the manipulator gains his goals at the expense of another person, this method becomes devious and exploitative. Social influence is not always negative. It is generally perceived as harmless when it does not break the boundaries set by their intended target, unduly coercive. Example, family or friends can use social influence to help target to change bad habits or behaviors. Manipulation vs Persuasion There is no manipulation without using persuasion and persuasion is a form of manipulation. So what is the difference between the two? According to Robert Greene, author of “The 48 Laws of Power”, manipulation and persuasion are the same; any persuasive attempt is an attempt to manipulate. Greene is right but not really 100% right. There are very few who are always honest as much as there are few people that are dishonest and manipulative all the time but it does not mean manipulation and persuasion are the same. with a cost to the intended target; persuasion does not. Techniques of Manipulation Subliminal Manipulation When one speaks of subliminal manipulation, the first thing that comes to mind is the audio back masking of the song “Stairway to Heaven by Led Zeppelin” Audio masking is done by embedding vocal messages that cannot be heard but often when you play the track backwards, it emits a different message. However, subliminal comes in many forms. In fact, some are visible but people are unaware of it. Symbols, scents, fonts and typefaces, sizes, shapes, and colors are subtly embedded with messages that create learned responses and appeals to one’s instinct. Did you ever wonder why yellow makes you feel warm, or why blue calms you? The mind is separated by the conscious and subconscious. The conscious mind evaluates all information it receives then filter all the information the mind wants to receive. The subconscious store all the information filtered by the conscious mind. However, the two cannot work separately. The subconscious cannot filter and evaluate nor can the conscious mind store information long. Unfortunately, it is possible to bypass critical and analytical filters of the conscious mind. But the real key in subliminal manipulation is repetition. Repetition of messages can wear down the filters of the conscious mind, thus stored directly in the subconscious. Once in the subconscious, it creates a learned response or familiarity that turns into acceptance and eventually belief. Blackmail Blackmail is the use of threat or coercion by the manipulator in exchange for his or her silence over damaging information they can reveal about the target; the information may be true or fabricated. Blackmail is also synonymous with extortion; extortion requires exchanging personal property through threat or coercion. Blackmail is a statutory crime in various countries across the world including the Unites States and United Kingdom. Emotional Blackmail Emotional blackmail is a form of blackmail that uses the target’s emotions to control and manipulate target’s way of thinking and behavior. They manipulator appeals to the target’s sense of obligation, fear, and guilt to get his own way. Emotional blackmail is most often subtle but insidious in nature like showing disappointment or withholding affection to the target when he cannot control the situation. There are six stages wherein emotional blackmail progresses according to author and therapist Dr. Susan Forward: 1. The first stage is making a demand. The demand maybe explicit or subtle with the pretext of doing it as a way of caring for you. In reality, it is a way of trying to control you. 2. The second stage is resistance. Target resists the demand by either direct or subtle resistance. The blackmailer will push back against the target’s resistance and will try to wear target down. 3. The third stage is pressure. Once the blackmailer realizes target is resisting, he starts to apply pressure. In a healthy relationship, when one expresses resistance, the other partner either finds an agreeable solution or drops the issue. A blackmailer will find ways to wear down the target’s resistance using guilt, criticism, and demeaning words. 4. If pressure does not work, the blackmailer resorts to the fourth stage, threats. The threats may come in direct and indirect form. Direct threat confrontational and designed to instill fear while indirect appeals to the target’s sense of guilt. 5. Threats works most of the times so you give in. The fifth stage is compliance. Once the blackmailer wears you down, you have no other option but to give in. The blackmailer becomes sweet, loving, nice, and kind and you lower your resistance because you gain peace of mind. You start to wonder why you resisted in the first place. 6. The result of the first five stages; repetition. Once you give, the blackmailer will realize that his tactic worked and will use the Same tactic every time a similar situation comes up. Your mind will be conditioned to the idea that giving in is easier than resisting. Putting down the other person The word belittle comes to mind; the manipulator acts or behave in a way to make the target feel unimportant, small, or inferior. This is one manipulative technique, which is hard to identify because it usually happens in private. The danger of this technique is that the target can start believing that he or she is insignificant and inferior as the manipulator says. Creating an Illusion Black is black and white is white. There are no shades in between. Just as truth is truth and a lie is a lie. Unfortunately, things and situations can get blurry and what seems to be white can tum black and vice versa. So, a lie can be twisted by using an illusion of truth. Remember the subconscious stores information making it familiar in the mind until it becomes the truth. Familiarity is embedded through repetition. What is familiar in the subconscious becomes real even if it is only an illusion. Sometimes the perception of reality is more real than reality itself. Chapter 10: Other Emotional anipulation Techniques techniques discussed in the previous chapter is just scratching the surface. Here are other emotional manipulation techniques designed to divert and silence their targets Projection Manipulation Projection manipulation to put it in layman’s term is simply projecting the manipulator’s perceived flaws and negative emotions to other people so the manipulator won’t have to deal with them. As a result, of this, the manipulator becomes the “victim” or the “righteous one,” Everything that happens to the manipulator is everyone’s fault but never his. Isolation Manipulation Isolation is almost impossible to separate from domestic abuse. Isolation is the most common technique employed in most domestic abuse cases. This is so the manipulator can convince the target that he or she can only rely on the manipulator and no one else.Usually, the manipulator will use various ways to keep the target from having contract with friends and family. The manipulator will either lie or make the target feel guilty just to keep the target away from friends and family. Often, the manipulator will tell target that the target’s family is against the manipulator and wants to keep them apart. The target would believe it to be true and thus effectively isolate the target. Positive Reinforcement In the context of behavioral psychology, reinforcement is a consequence received by any organism (be it man or animal) to build up future behavior whenever that particular behavior is triggered by a specific antecedent stimuli. Reinforcement is either positive or negative. Positive reinforcement happens when the organism is given a desirable stimulus or event because of a particular behavior. Positive reinforcement increases the chances of the organism repeating the same behavior in similar circumstances. Example, a dog gets a treat after he performs a particular trick for you. The treat is the positive reinforcement for your dog increasing the chance of him performing more tricks for you. Negative Reinforcement If there is a positive, there is a negative. In negative reinforcement, the behavior is strengthened when an aversive stimuli or event is prevented or removed from happening. Example, your child asked permission to go out instead of sneaking out and because of this, you no longer ground him or her. The “grounding” is the negative reinforcement that reinforces his bad behavior. Removing the consequence will convince your child that asking permission is the better alternative. Punishment Punishment is applied to reduce the likelihood of a particular behavior from occurring again. There are two types of punishment in behavior learning process, positive punishment or punishment by application and negative punishment or punishment by removal. Negative punishment punishes a behavior by using an aversive stimulus. Example, a child gets “time out” for behaving badly. The “time out” stops when the child apologizes for the bad behavior. The positive punishment is the “time out” which is an unpleasant stimulus. Negative punishment is often related to negative reinforcement because similarly, negative punishment occurs with the removal of a pleasant stimulus, thus reducing the chances of a behavior being repeated. Example, a child refuses to sleep early. The parent takes away a privilege like watching TV before bedtime. The later he sleeps the lesser the chance of his privilege being returned. Watching TV is the child’s pleasant stimulus and taking it away motivates the child to have an early bedtime. Nagging Nagging is a repetitive form of persuasion that manipulators employ as alternative to a more aggressive technique in gaining compliance. The manipulator sets out to gain the target’s compliance by directing the target to perform a specific behavior or task. It is human nature to resist but the manipulator will repeatedly ask the target’s compliance until the target becomes weary. The target will soon find that compliance is a much better prospect than resistance. Yelling Yelling or shouting is an aggressive tactic manipulators employ when they feel that they are about to lose control of the target or the argument. Raising their voice or talking louder is their way of dominating the conversation and intimidating the target in cowering into submission. You can diffuse this by remaining calm and replying in a softer voice. Silent Treatment This technique plays on the emotions of the target. The manipulator subjects the target into a silent treatment making the target feel guilty. The manipulator will ignore the target, which would frustrate the target. Usually occurs in an emotional relationship when the manipulator wants to be in control. The silent treatment often inspires feelings of guilt, doubts, and insecurities in the target and usually ends up giving in to what the manipulator wants. Intimidation Intimidation is not just physical but emotional and verbal as well. Physical intimidation occurs when a manipulator use their size and built to intimidate others smaller than them. A husband can use verbal threats to intimidate his wife into submission. A person who is in higher authority or someone with higher connection can use power to prey on their target’s emotion by instilling fear in them. Intimidation can be direct or covert Traumatic One Trial Learning This technique employs yelling, verbal abuse, explosive anger and other behaviors designed to intimidate the target in order to establish superiority or dominance. Targets turn compliant even if this display only happens once to avoid inciting the same traumatic experience from the manipulator. Manipulation of Facts There are two common ways you can manipulate facts, by outright lying or by omission. Manipulator can alter facts by directly lying to the target and distorting the truth to suit his needs. The manipulator can also omit part of the facts or omit certain words to twist and distort the facts. Manipulation can be positive or negative too. If the manipulator’s intent is malicious, it becomes negative but when it will be for the greater good of the target, it becomes positive. A good example of a positive manipulation of facts is telling your child that visiting the dentist is not a painful experience. Triangulation Manipulation Triangulation employs bringing perspective, opinion, and an outsider suggested threat into an argument. Triangulation aims to validate the manipulator’s behavior while invalidating the target’s response to abuse. The technique works effectively in emotional relationships that leaves the target feeling insecure and unhinged. Often, manipulators use other people’s opinion to enforce their views. Aggressive Jokes This is a covert technique; usually presented as “jokes” to disguise the malicious and appalling words or things the manipulator says. When confronted, the manipulator turn things around by accusing the target of not having any sense of humor. The target is perceived as being “too sensitive” to divert attention from the manipulator’s cruelty and sadistic intent. Chapter 11: Reverse Psychology A Mom who didn’t want her young teenage daughter to have a boyfriend early tell her, “Ok, it’s up to you if you want to marry young, just look at what happened to your cousin.” The daughter did not start dating until she turned 18. Or a wife telling her forgetful husband, “It’s fine if you cannot come home early for dinner. At least I wont have to get tired and just sleep.” The husband surprised her with a dinner reservation at a fine dining restaurant. Do they sound familiar? Everyone at one point in their life is guilty of using this tactic to make their target do what they want even if they say the opposite; reverse psychology. What is Reverse Psychology Reverse psychology is a tactic that involves asserting behavior or belief that is opposite to the desired outcome with the expectation that this approach will persuade the target to do the desired outcome. This tactic depends on the psychological process of reactance. Psychological reactance is a person’s negative emotional response to persuasion and thus reacts the opposite way. How to use Reverse Psychology Reverse psychology is as effective as you utilize it. If you use it often or too obvious about it still boils down to one thing, manipulation. Reverse psychology is often used so much that it becomes second nature. People have a tendency to pull all the stops to make things happen they no longer realize they are doing them. When used in a wrong way, reverse psychology it can turn into something awkward. How would you feel if someone discovers you are trying to manipulate him or her? It can break or scar a relationship or friendship or, just imagine how your conscience will react once you realized how manipulative you have become. Reverse psychology does not affect everyone. Generally, there are two kinds of people — resistant and compliant. Resistant people tend to be jaded; more biased and only see things in black and white. Compliant people tend to follow without question or blowback. If you want to use reverse psychology, you need to know if your target is a resistant or compliant. However, there is this thing called “free will,” They can decide to choose what direction they will go to with their decisions. People learn and change. If you were able to use reverse psychology at one point in their life, it does not mean you can do so again. You may find that who was before compliant has learned his or her lesson and is now more resistant. Here are four simple steps you can follow on how to use reverse psychology in a good way. Step 1 When you want someone to side with you or agree to your idea, plant the seed in their head. Offer them options of that relates to your idea. Example you and your fiancée are planning your wedding. Your fiancée agreed with his Mother to have a blue color themed wedding. While blue is good, you really want a lilac to be your color theme. You cannot offend your future mother in law but it is your wedding not hers. So you drop hints that you want the color to be lilac. Compare the two colors and discuss them with your fiancée. You can show him color swatches in lilac and blue. Discuss how the lilac color suits your skin tone compared to blue. Then tell him you can wear his Mother’s hairpiece with blue stones as part of the “something borrowed something blue,” Just give the options, do not push for a decision. Allow the idea to sink in and do not overwhelm them with so many choices. Just keep it simple. Step 2 Ask your fiancée again about the options you presented. Ask him what he thinks or if he has any suggestions. Drop more hints. Let him hear you discussing with your girlfriends’ about the wedding. How their husbands gave them free rein on what they want for their wedding. Talk to them how you love the idea of having your dream wedding but you respect your mother in law too much and have no wish to offend her. How you would love to have your dream wedding happen but you cannot make the decision alone because it is after all a wedding for two, not just one. Step 3 Go in for the kill. Tell him you are meeting with the wedding planner and finalizing the details for the wedding. You can discuss with him that you have decided to choose blue as your theme and how it will be disrespectful of her not to follow his Mother’s suggestion. Anyway, what is in a color, right? It is just a wish and not all wishes come true. Your fiancée will start to think why he is following someone else’s suggestion and not yours considering that this is your dream wedding. She tells her fiancée “Family is important, you are important to me than my dream wedding.” He will start to feel guilty because he did promise you your dream wedding. Step 4 He suddenly tells you that a lilac theme would look perfect as it suits your skin tone more and it is your favorite color. He would tell you to go ahead, choose the color you want. He would even tell you lilac flowers and candles would look great as decors and suddenly he is giving suggestions as if the color theme is his idea. Reverse psychology can be a powerful tool but you need to use it in a positive way and not as a weapon to take advantage of others. Reverse Psychology tactics Reverse psychology tactics varies, and success depends on who and how you use it. Here are some tactics often used: Reverse psychology on children Children have high reactance tendency and the more headstrong a child; the more susceptible they are to reverse psychology. When your child is contrary using reverse psychology always work however, do not abuse it. When using reverse psychology on your child, challenge them instead of issuing orders. They will want to test you so expect them to challenge your authority. When this happens, keep from being emotional. Offer them options and reward them positively. Lastly, reverse psychology should always be your last option to discipline your child. Reverse psychology on business Product availability is important in business. Visibility is paramount if you want your product to become well known. However, marketers are using reverse psychology as a tactic to make consumers clamor for your brand by making it “limited,” When something is hard to find, the more people want it. Reverse psychology in relationships Reverse psychology is often present in any relationships. Guilt tripping is a common tool employed in using reverse psychology in a relationship. Example, wife wants to go out with her friends, the husband would say sure honey, I am sure you will enjoy their company than staying here at home. The wife would then rethink her decision to leave and instead stay at home. Chapter 12: Brainwashing Brainwashing is the idea that the brain may be controlled or altered, using psychological techniques. Brainwashing can reduce a target’s critical thinking allowing introduction of unwanted and new ideologies; change their values, beliefs and attitudes. Brainwashing is also referred to as menticide, thought reform, mind control, thought control, coercive persuasion and re education. Brainwashing was first used by Edward Hunter in 1950 to give description on how the Chinese government can make it appear that everyone cooperates with them. During the 1970s, a legal and scientific debate ensued on the idea of brainwashing being a mean to convert young people in cults. Steps of the brainwashing process Brainwashing is a process. It cannot happen with just a flick of a finger. Studies have been made regarding brainwashing but one of the most popular was the one made by American psychiatrist and author Robert Jay Lifton who is known for his theory on brainwashing or what he termed as “thought reform,” The following process is based on his study of two French priests subjected to brainwashing. 1. Assault on Identity The manipulator attacks the identity of the person. Take a married couple as an example. A husband telling his wife that she is not a real wife. This can seriously destabilize the confidence of the wife and she will start to question her identity. Losing her identity weakens her values and beliefs making it easier to change. 2. Guilt Tripping The manipulator makes the target guilty of wrongdoing, which eventually leads the target to feel shame and deserving of punishment. The husband blames the wife for her shortcoming further undermining her confidence in her ability to be a wife. 3. Isolation and self betrayal The target is kept in isolation and is forced to denounce family and friends. This reinforces her feeling of guilt and destroys the target’s sense of identity. The husband tells his wife that he needs her at home and hope that she will stay home instead of going out with friends or family. This effectively separates the wife from her old life opening a ground to build a new personality. 4. Breaking Point The repetitive process will eventually wear down the target leading them to break down, similarly to a “nervous breakdown,” They become agitated, fall into a fit of crying and deep depression. Psychologically, they feel that they are losing themselves until they become an empty shell of who or what they are. 5. Small Reward and Leniency When the manipulator realizes that the target is at breaking point, they offer a small measure of kindness. A respite from all the manipulative tactics. Example, the husband will start taking the wife out for dinner dates, bring her flowers or pamper her. During this moment of despair and darkness, the target will feel grateful even if the kindness delivered is from the manipulator. 6. The Need to Give Back The gratitude the target feels is overwhelming. The feel obligated to repay the leniency they received from the manipulator. The target feels the need to confess the guilt and shame created by the assault on the target’s identity. This is the target’s way of repaying the kindness extended by the manipulator. In the example, the wife will feel guilt and shame about putting her husband’s needs before others. She will feel the need to repay this by giving in to his requests and admitting to him that she is wrong. 7. Channeling the Guilt The target will lose sens of what they are really guilty of. All they can feel is the heavy sense of being wrong. They feel confused having lost their self identity. The manipulator uses this guilt to redirect the target; that the target is living in a wrong and bad ideology. The husband will tell the wife that it is not her who should feel guilty but her family and friends who are teaching her wrong things. Only he can give her the love and care that she needs. 8. Reeducation: Throwing Old Ideology The target will start to believe that the guilt stems from wrong beliefs imposed by external influences. They will accept this reasoning to justify the guilt and shame they feel to the point that will reject their old beliefs and ideologies. The wife will start avoiding family and friends and instead will choose to stay with her husband. She will shun them and will not accept any reasoning. 9. Reeducation: New Ideology Rejecting old ideologies will leave a hole that would allow acceptance of new ideologies. Since the new ideologies are opposite of the old one, it is easy for manipulator to convince the target to accept it. Reeducation will be easier by presenting the new ideologies as suitable and harmonious to the target. The husband tell the wife that her friends and family are trying to put a wedge between them, which is not good especially if they are trying to build a family. 10. Rebirth Faced with the prospect of an attractive ideology, the target lets go of the old ideology and accepts the new one. To the target, it would feel like a rebirth. Usually, acceptance would include a ritual where the target embraces the new ideology and swearing allegiance to the manipulator. In cults, this is made symbolic by performing symbolic acts. The wife promises the husband obedience and to always listen to him. She promised to follow whatever he wants to the point of submission. Common techniques used in brainwashing In brainwashing, the manipulator aims to change the target’s thoughts and beliefs in a 360 degree manner. Here are top three most effective brainwashing technique employed by manipulators: Chapter 13: Hypnosis In 1820 mesmerism practitioner Etienne Félix d'Henin de Cuvillers coined the words hypnosis and hypnotism derived from the neuro hypnotism or nervous sleep . The term hypnosis comes from the Ancient Greek word “hypnos” , which means “sleep” and the suffix “osis,” But what is hypnosis in the psychological sense, and why is it one of the most common form of mind control? The English version of the words were made popular by Scottish surgeon James Braid. What is hypnosis It was Braid who gave the earliest definition of hypnosis. He described hypnosis as a “status of mental concentration that that often turns to a progressive relaxation mode, which he called nervous sleep.” In 2005, the American Psychological Association (APA) through the Society of Psychological Hypnosis Division 30 provided a new definition of hypnosis. According to APA hypnosis involves an explanation and purpose of the procedure. Hypnosis is used to encourage and evaluate reactions to suggestions. A person (usually the subject) is guided by a practitioner (the hypnotist) to respond or react to suggestions for alterations in perception, emotion, sensation, thought or behavior and changes in subjective experience. Hypnosis generally happens if the subject reacts or responds to the suggestions. Induction Hypnosis is usually preceded by using a “hypnotic induction” technique. Old school viewed it as a way of subjecting the subject into a hypnotic trance but subsequent interpretations see it as way to heighten subject’s expectation. There are several induction techniques employed; the most influential is Braid’s “eye fixation” technique or “Braidism,” Variations of “eye fixation” technique were later developed but Braid’s technique remains to be the most autoreactive. Suggestion Braid did not use the word “suggestion” when he described hypnotism but referred to the act of centering the conscious mind on a single foremost idea. His main therapeutic strategy includes reducing or stimulating physiological functions in different areas of the body. In his subsequent works, Braid increased focus on the use of various verbal and non verbal modes of suggestions. However, Hippolyte Bernheim switched the focus from the physical to the psychological process. Bernheim defined hypnotism as an induction of an unusual psychical condition that increases susceptibility to suggestion. Susceptibility Braid termed two stages of hypnosis that he referred to as the first and second stages of consciousness. Later on, he changed this into three hypnosis stages whereas the first is referred to as the “sub hypnotic” stage, the second one as the “full hypnotic” stage, and the last one as the stage of “hypnotic coma.” An analogous distinction was raised later on by Jean Martin Charcot that he referred to as “somnambulism,” “lethargy”, and “catalepsy,” However, a more intricate hypnotic “depth” scale based physiological, behavioral and subjective responses from direct and indirect suggestion were introduced by Ambroise Auguste Liébeault and Bernheim. It wasn’t until early 20" century that early clinical “depth” scale was replaced by more advanced scales of “hypnotic susceptibility” based on new research and experiments. Applications Applications for hypnosis expands across various fields of interest, including military uses, psychotherapeutic/medical uses, entertainment and self improvement. Although the American Medical Association has no official stand on its medical use, a study published by the Council on Mental Health of the same institution documented the value of hypnosis in the clinical settings. Artists employed hypnosis for creative purposes. It has been also used in education, physical therapy, forensics, rehabilitation and sports. Self hypnosis is popular among smokers who want to quit, weight loss, alleviate anxiety and stress while stage hypnosis can help persuade subjects to perform unusual feats publicly. Hypnotherapy Hypnotherapy is used in psychotherapy to treat disorders such as anxiety, sleep disorder, eating disorder, compulsive gambling, depression and post traumatic stress. It has also been used as alternative to chemical anesthesia. Some studies also showed that hypnosis could help aid in pain management in dental surgery, cancer treatments, childbirth, and burn treatment. Military Applications There is no evidence that shows hypnosis is used for military applications. According to a declassified document from the US Freedom of Information Act archive, using hypnosis in intelligence can cause certain technical problems not normally encountered in a laboratory or clinic. Obtaining compliance from a resistant subject would require essentially hostile circumstance. There is no evidence showing this is possible. Self hypnosis As the word suggest, this occurs when someone hypnotizes oneself by using autosuggestion. Self hypnosis is used to help increase motivation to quit smoking, for a diet, or reduce stress. Using self hypnosis sometimes requires the use of devices like the “mind machines” while others use hypnotic recordings. Stage Hypnosis Stage hypnosis is more of an entertainment usually conducted in theatre or club in front of an audience. In stage hypnosis, the hypnotist usually attempts to hypnotize the audience and then select different subjects supposedly “under” his control to join him on stage. The hypnotist then ask these subjects to perform embarrassing acts. However, the effects of stage hypnosis is probably due to suggestibility, participant selection, physical manipulation, the desire of the subject to be the center of attention rather than real hypnosis. Types of Hypnosis Traditional Hypnosis In traditional hypnosis, the subject is placed in a deep relaxed state before hypnotic suggestions into the subconscious. This is the easiest hypnosis technique but it is not effective to highly analytical subjects. Ericksonian Hypnosis Ericksonian hypnosis, name after Dr. Milton Erickson uses metaphors instead of using direct suggestions in his hypnotic approach. This approach lets the mind to approach a problem in a more organic way. Most effective to highly critical and logical subject. Embedded Technique This covert hypnosis technique is one of the most powerful and most effective. An expert hypnotist can layer messages deep within normal conversation without using direct messages and without the subject realizing it. NLP (Neuro Linguistic Programming) Neuro Linguistic Programming is the most advanced hypnosis technique and should only be done by a highly trained hypnotherapist. It is used to treat severe additions or severe problems by brain programming. Effective on subjects who have severe addictions. Video Hypnosis Video hypnosis are pre recorded messages and videos they ask subjects to watch. This is effective for those who wish to induce self hypnosis. Subliminal Hypnosis Subliminal hypnosis is covert hypnosis. The subliminal message goes directly to the subconscious. The brain’s subconscious cannot filter messages and through repetition, the messages are embedded into the subconscious until it becomes familiar and acceptable. Chapter 14: Covert Hypnosis 7 Á Covert means hidden. Hypnosis is using suggestions repetitively to alter one’s perception, emotion, sensation, thought or behavior. What then is covert hypnosis? What is covert hypnosis As introduced earlier the mind is made of the conscious and unconscious or subconscious part. The conscious mind is the filter while the subconscious is the storage and has no capability to filter all and any information presented to the mind. However, it is possible to reach the subconscious directly. Covert hypnosis attempts to do this by attempting to communicate directly with the subconscious. The idea is to slip in suggestions into the subconscious without the knowledge of the subject. Suggestions are made in regular conversations, which is why covert hypnosis is also called “conversational hypnosis,” This term is widely used in NLP or Neuro Linguistic Programming. More on NLP in another chapter. There is a debate whether covert hypnosis works because standard hypnosis usually requires attention and focus of the subject. To do this, one is aware that hypnotism is taking place. In covert hypnosis, the subject is unaware hypnotism is taking place. Covert hypnosis uses fatigue and confusion to hypnotize. When the subject is in fatigue, critical thinking is affected making it easy for the manipulator to use suggestions to influence their thinking. Covert hypnosis techniques Expert hypnotists can execute covert hypnosis with ease and without the intended subject knowing about it. Covert hypnosis becomes successful when the subject follows the hypnotist’s command without thinking that they are under hypnosis. In the wrong hands, covert hypnosis can prove to be fatal. It would probably take years before you can master covert hypnosis but here are some easy techniques you can follow: Deception Technique To execute covert hypnosis, the hypnotist use deception by lying or distorting truth to trigger a response from the subject. They hypnotist’s goal is to create a bond with the subject to earn their trust. Once they have the subject’s trust, they use suggested comments so the subject believes the illusion the hypnotist created. Eye Cues Technique “Your yes are the windows to your soul. ” Covert hypnotists use this old adage to their advantage. During covert hypnosis, hypnotists’ look at their subjects straight to the eye and use their eye cues to know what they are thinking. A person can reveal a lot with the how their eyes move or respond to a particular question. A person’s eye movement can reveal a lot of their thoughts. Cold Reading Technique Cold reading technique involves making the subject or subjects believe the hypnotist can read their minds. You can accomplish this by using tactics like suggesting vague statements; depending on the subject’s response would subtly change their statement making it appear the hypnotist can read your mind. Hot Reading Technique This technique is one of the most potent covert hypnosis technique. The hypnotist uses observations and statements designed to shock and amaze the subject with its genuineness and explicit nature. This is only possible if the hypnotist has prior knowledge or acquired knowledge about the subject. Sub modalities Technique In this covert hypnosis technique, the hypnotist studies the variations of the subject’s response to different questions or scenarios. The hypnotist chooses his words carefully with the aim of triggering a response in a specific context. He can either refines his words or use them again to elicit the emotions he needs from the subject. Misdirection Technique This covert hypnosis technique is very popular among magicians. The object of this technique is to divert the attention of the subject from the hypnotist’s real intent by embedding thoughts that would distract the subject’s attention. To do this, the hypnotist repeats the same words in a different context so the subject will not analyze the words too deeply. Non Direct Conversation Covert Hypnosis Techniques Other covert hypnosis techniques do not require direct conversation. Hypnotist can induce hypnosis using the following techniques without using conversation: e Use of relaxation and meditation. When you are relaxed and under meditation, your conscious mind relaxes. When the conscious mind is relaxed, the subconscious mind takes over allowing you to communicate with your unconscious mind. e Use of brainwave synchronizer. Often use by clinicians and dentists, this electronic device is a simple flashing light so the subject will not know the hypnotist used it. e Use of olfactory. The scent of a person, your favorite food, the smell of your favorite places affects your mood or emotional state. The scent can trigger strong emotions that can be of effectively use in hypnosis. e Use of video recordings. A recorded video of a person being hypnotized can induce hypnosis to another subject watching it. The tempo and tone of your voice are very important tools in covert hypnosis. The differences in your vocal sound can help you control your subject. You can master this by training yourself through voice training programs. Conversational Hypnosis Conversational hypnosis happens naturally on a daily basis. When one speaks of hypnosis, the first that comes to mind is one of those Hollywood movies where the person hypnotized goes in a “trance,” Trance is when one connects to the unconscious mind. Body functions like digesting food, falling asleep and breathing are all controlled by the unconscious mind. However going on a trance is more than what you would normally see in a movie. Skilled hypnotists can induce “trance” and make you change just using a regular conversation. You can say then that conversational hypnosis is a systematic and scientific method of inducing a trance using regular conversation. According to the Hypnosis Training Academy, there are three elements to a successful conversational hypnosis: Chapter 15: Dark Psychology Tricks and Tactics } Compiled in this chapter are ten of the most common and simplest tricks and tactics that you can use to get ahead or gain advantage over someone or something. Not all of these tricks are evil but they can help give you an edge in life, relationship and work. Silence with Eye Contact One trick to get information from target is from eye contact. When asking details from your target, gauge how they respond to you. If you feel that you are not getting full information, ask a question then remain silent for a few seconds while maintaining eye contact with the target. This will make them uncomfortable and would do anything to break the awkwardness even if it means giving out more information than intended. Continue the silence and they are more likely to continue to talk. The Lurker Detector If you are a target of a stalker or if you feel as if someone is watching you, you can find out who it is with a simple psychological trick. Yawn. It may sound weird but yawning is contagious. Watch someone yawn and see if you find yourself yawning. Even reading or saying the word “yawn” is enough push you into doing the action. To catch your stalker, make sure that everyone around you see you yawn. After yawning, turn and look around and watch the people around you. If you see anyone yawning, you will find out who is watching you. Nodding Act Making a person agree with what you are saying is not easy but using a simple psychological trick as “nodding” your head can turn around someone opposing your view. The “nodding” of head can make someone believe your statements and thus, will most likely start to nod as well and agree. However, be careful, as this trick does not work on everyone. Aim High This trick is common in business transactions. When you a real estate agent wants to close a sale, they would usually price the property at a ridiculously high price. Of course, the target will negotiate until the target feels that it he or she was able to negotiate a good discount. In truth, the price they settled on is the real price of the property. Another trick is to offer a high price and when they say no, offer the real amount. The target will usually feel bad for saying no a second time after you gave a big discount and will most likely accept your lower offer. Worn Out Fatigue can wear down a target. If you want to get easy compliance from your target, do it when you know they are tired and worn out. Fatigue can deplete both mental and physical energy leaving the target vulnerable and easy prey. This trick is effective when kids try to wheedle additional allowance from their parents who just got home from a tiring day. Fatigue can wore out a person physically and mentally; robbing them of their ability to make rational decisions and the target finds it easier to give in than argue. Mimicking Mirror This technique involves copying another person’s speech and body language. According to research, copying someone’s body language can make the person subconsciously identify with you; they are more likely do what you want. People tend to establish easy rapport when they see similar attitudes, actions, and speech patterns towards another person. It makes them think you are in sync with them and will trust you more. However, do not be too obvious when mimicking because it can put them off. Paraphrasing One of the most effective technique to convince a target that you are really listening and understanding them is by paraphrasing their words and say it back to them. Counselors call this communication technique as reflective listening. This makes your target feel that you are into them and would open up easily to you. However, be careful about doing this often because it can work against you. The Name Game Have you ever felt offended when people do not remember your name? A person’s name is the most important word to anyone. A person’s name is the bane of his existence and hearing it validates your identity as a person. It makes the person hearing it feel that they are respected and important. This establishes rapport and trust allowing the person to be friendlier. Example, two managers asked their janitor to clean their office. One manager told the janitor “please make sure to clean the room” while the other manager said, “John, please make sure to clean the room.” Which office do you think John will clean first? The Science of a Smile Charles Darwin discovered that a smile can serve as manifestation of happiness and can help connect with other people. A smile is contagious, when you see someone smiling at you, you cannot help but smile back. A smile can make a person feel more at ease and comfortable. It makes them feel that they can trust you. However, there are instances when smiling is inappropriate like if you are discussing a death in the family. This may not be the best time to smile. Door in the Face This is a well known social psychology technique, which employs the rule of reciprocity. The idea is to ask a huge request to the target knowing that they are most likely to say no. Then follow this up with a more reasonable request and ensure they make a commitment to fulfill that request. The principle of reciprocity makes it harder for a person to say “No” a second time especially if they feel a favor was done for them, in this case the scale down version of the request. Example, you ask a friend if he or she would be willing to join a fund raising campaign for the homeless. This is a huge request of their time, money, and effort that your friend will most likely turn down. So you ask instead, if he or she can sponsor a meal for one homeless person. Dark Psychology Vol. 2 By PSYCHOLOGY ED ACADEMY & CARL GOLEMAN Contents — Dark Psychology Vol. 2 Chapter_1: Non Verbal_ Communication Body_Language and Common Gestures What is Body Language The Origins of Body Language Non Verbal Communication — Appearance and Sounds Sounds Proteomics or Distance/Space Communication through Action Symbols Emotional Undertones of Words Non Verbal Communication — Body Language in Life Situations Body Language For Seduction Body Language Techniques For Public Speaking Effective Body language Techniques and Tips for Teachers / the Classroom Chapter 2: Cold Reading What is cold reading Cold Reading ‘Techniques How to use cold reading Social Scalper Chapter 5: Dark Psychol the Male Dark. a five Bonboi Chapter ye Dark es In aes TN ee fa EEEE Chapter 8: Dark Psychology_In Politics During campaigns Once in power ark Psychology_In Groups Ta Group Tactics The Nazi Sala Noi oise as tals Varfare Dark Psychology_on the Air Master and Servant Veiled Threat and Guilt Tripping The Blamer Playing Indifferent r 12: Gaslighting What is Ga ee Chapter 1: Non Verbal Communication Body anguage and Common Gestures Non verbal communication is a wordless communication usually expressed either overtly or covertly through appearance , sounds and body language . What is Body Language Body language is one of the three elements of non verbal communication expressed through physical behavior such as gestures, body posture, eye movement, facial expression, use of space and touch. Body language is not a language that has grammar like the spoken words or like sign language. Body language is an interpreted meaning that corresponds with a particular movement or gesture. Interpretation varies from one country or culture to another. The Origins of Body Language The history of body language dates back as far as the Stone Age when waving and grunting was enough to understand one another. Many of the gestures and non verbal communication studies came from prime apes who first used gesticulations to communicate. The first to study about body language and its origin is none other than the Father of Evolution, Charles Darwin. In his book “The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals”, he set the science behind body language and many observations and studies today are based on his studies. In his observation and findings, he noticed the similarities of inborn behavior between animals and humans. However, major studies of body language started in the 60s and since then it became a subject of study in the fields of social science, psychiatry, business, and anthropology. There is no real communication face to face or otherwise without body language. Even when you are just speaking over the phone, you make gestures while conversing even if the person on the other end does not see you. Both non verbal and verbal communication complements one another. Reading and Understanding Body Language Eyes The eyes, they say is “the window to your soul,” How your eyes move, convey a lot of meanings. Blinking Most often, blinking suggests deceitfulness or dishonesty but not necessarily true in some cases. Blinking can also suggest that worry, fear, uncomfortable, or going through something difficult. Pupil constriction and dilation Eye pupils usually dilates when a person feels positive or attracted towards someone or something. But, not in all cases. Your pupils dilate as a reaction to the stimulation of the nervous system so your pupils will also dilate in anger or fear. Your pupils constrict when you have feelings of dislike or disgusted towards something or someone; sometimes accompanied by squinting of the eyes or narrowing of the eyes. Whatever reasons for your pupil size, the thing to remember is your pupils dilate in response to anything positive and constrict in response to anything negative. Hands, Arms and Legs Hands, arms, and legs gestures are usually used to emphasize a point but there are instinctive gesture of these body parts that reveal many emotions. Crossing the arms against the chest Crossing the arms usually indicates defensiveness. Another perception is that the person disagrees with another person’s actions or opinions. Some people cross their arms as a sign of anxiety or vulnerability. However, crossing the arms can also mean a sign of confidence especially if accompanied by a smile or a relaxed posture. Steepling Placing the fingertips together or “steepling” shows control or authority. If you will notice, most bosses or person of authority uses this gesture. This gesture is useful if you are in a business meeting, presenting a proposal or in an interview. When the person of authority makes this move, it shows that he is confident things are going in his favor. Example, if the interviewer uses this gesture, it tells you he is confident he has found the right person for the job. However, this action is not all positive. If the hand gesture comes with his palms closed, leaning back on his chair, and shaking of his head then in it spells negative. Take note though that in card games, this action is a positive response. Legs apart stance This standing leg position is a usually seen predominantly in males, particularly in military men. A person using this stance is telling the world that he is standing his ground, immovable, resolute, and dominant. This is the opposite of the parallel leg stance where both feet are placed closely together, showing subordinate position. Facial Expressions/Facial Gestures Facial expressions or gestures are the result of how a particular emotion affects your face. It is not hard to recognize basic human emotions but the muscle movements of your face can be telling. Here are three of the most basic emotion humans feel and how it affects their facial muscles. Happiness or Joy When you smile, the eyebrows are lightly raised creating light wrinkles on your forehead despite its relaxed state. The corners of the mouth curls up and sometimes shows your teeth. A loud laugh would have the mouth open and the cheekbones lifted; the outer corner of the eyes show wrinkles. Anger The teeth are showing and the lips forms in a snarl; corners of the mouth depressed. The eyebrows push together; nose is wrinkled and nostrils flaring. The eyes bulges putting tension on the eyelids. Sadness The comers of the mouth is depressed; lower lip shaking. The brows squashed together with a frown on the forehead. The skin around the eyes pulled and tearing up or crying. Wrinkles form around the corner of the mouth to the nostrils. Breathing Patterns People’s breathing patterns differ depending on their mood. A long deep breath usually indicates relief, anger, or fatigue. A slow breath indicates thoughtfulness or a state of calm. A fast breath usually happens when you are under positive stress (excited) or negative stress (worried, anxious, nervous). Torso and Posture Posture is the way you hold yourself and it is difficult to read because controlling your body posture is not easy. Still, it can shed insight when it is not how you usually carry yourself. Some examples to watch: e Leaning your torso against any support indicates disinterest or boredom. e Stand straight; hands_on the side shows openness and willingness to listen and engage. e Tilting _the body or the head to one side indicates concentration and interest. It can also indicate attraction depending on other body language indicators. Mouth and Lips Not all smiles are happy smiles. Each kind of smile holds a different meaning just like the way your lips move. A genuine smile would turn the corners of your mouth up accompanied by the narrowing of the eyes and wrinkles at the corner. An insincere or fake smile would not normally involve the eyes. It usually happens as a reaction to a discomfort. A smirk or half smile following an expression of contempt or displeasure may suggest disdain, uncertainty, or dislike. The movement of the lips can suggest different statements, a quivering lip suggest sadness or fear, a pursed lip can indicate disagreement or anger, and compressed lips suggest unease. Fidgeting and Movement Patterns Fidgeting is restless moving in a way that is not necessary to an ongoing event or task. Fidgeting is a label for unconscious postural movements people perform while standing or seating. Fidgeting results from agitation, excitement, boredom, nervousness, ADHD or combination of all these. Some examples of signs of fidgeting: e Shaking a pen while thinking e Twirling a ring or necklace e Tapping a foot. Non Verbal Communication — Appearance and Sounds Body language is not limited to body parts movements and gestures. A person’s appearance, hair color, make up, tone, sound of voice and even silence can also convey a message without using words to a receiver. Appearance A person’s appearance can convey a statement. When talking about appearance, it is not limited to physical beauty, height, skin color, weight, and body shape. The clothes, cosmetics, hairstyle, and accessories worn by person can speak volumes. The totality of a person’s appearance conveys visual clues to their age, personality, interest, style, sex, social standing, attitude; religious and political affiliations. The Body The human body is the most beautiful yet most complex of God’s creation. A person’s overall appearance and body conveys a view of one’s self to others. People spend a high amount of concern and mental energy towards their physical appearance because interpersonal relationships are mostly grounded on the degree of attraction towards physical appearance. Physical Features Physical features of a person conveys different meanings. As a chubby child is looked upon as “cute” whereas a chubby teenager is considered “fat,” The shape of a person’s body also holds different meanings. A woman with right curve proportion or a man with a six pack abs is considered “sexy” while a reed thin woman maybe be thought of as “bulimic,” Paleness vs Blushing The face reddens when a person blush. It is usually involuntary and triggered by embarrassment, passion, romantic stimulation, anger, or shyness. Paleness is the opposite of blushing. Paleness is often associated with fear, shock, nausea, or an illness like anemia. The Accessories Clothes and accessories people wear is also saying something. The type of clothes and color of clothing a person wear can tell about kind of personality he has. Some clothes also speak of the type of work they do. Accessories can also include jewelries, tattoos, piercings, cigarette, glasses and make up all convey a secret sign Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make up e When a person puts one side of his eyeglass frame at the corner of his lips the person is needing reassurance. This gesture also means the person is stalling or delaying a response. e A person wearing eyeglasses is often perceived as studious and intelligent. e A person can also intimidate another person by peering over his or her eyeglass e Women wearing make up looks more credible, particularly career women. e Make up makes women look confident and sexy. Bold and bright lipstick is okay on a date but more understated in business meetings. e Cigars are used to display power and superiority. e Women used cigarette as a sexual display and attract men. e Cigarette smoke blown up; positive, superior, and confident e Cigarette smoke blown down; suspicious, negative, secretive Sounds Audio communication or audible communication is message conveyed with the use of sound. This is an important means of non verbal communication. Example, in a movie, an ominous sound in the background usually signifies danger, a sound of thunder means rain follows. Even the sound emitted by people like moaning and groaning conveys meaning. + Touch This is the first silent or non verbal form of communication that humans learn. Touch can convey a wide range of emotions. When a baby is born, the Mother’s first touch conveys safety and comfort. Proteomics or Distance/Space Distance or space is a powerful way of conveying a message. The study of how to communicate with distance or space is called Proteomics. In a work environment, space indicates importance and position of a person by observing spaciousness and location of their office. Communication through Action Ever heard of the old adage “Action speaks louder than words.” A person’s action is another form of silent or non verbal communication to convey a specific message or meaning. A person’s nature, habit, desire, likes and dislikes can be revealed through his actions. Example, a person who always arrives on time shows his punctuality and dependability. Symbols Symbols is another silent form of communication. People use symbols and signs as representations of the message one needs to convey to the viewer. Example, A cross symbolizes churches, “V” sign means victory, “X” for prohibition or in mathematics it means multiplier, and cross bones on top of a skull signifies danger. Emotional Undertones of Words “It is not what you said but how you said it.” If someone says that to you, it is most likely that you used paralanguage. Paralanguage refers to the intonation of your voice accompanied by your words. In paralanguage, the vocal aspect of communication emphasize how the words were said rather than the words itself. Paralanguage can be an effective tool if use positively but if used negatively, it can cause hurt and conflict. The most common body language gestures you will see daily Here are five body language gestures most commonly seen: Non Verbal Communication — Body Language Tips and Tricks In this sections you will find various tips and tricks on how you can leverage body language effectively. It has been said that body language accounts to 60% of what a person communicates so learning to read non verbal cues can be a powerful tool in your daily communication. Here are five of the most powerful body language tips: 1. Adopt a power pose to boost self confidence. If you notice most men in uniform stands straight, feet apart and their hands either behind them or on their hips with the arms spread like butterfly wings. This is because they want to show power and dominance. A research suggests that making your body expansive can stimulate higher levels of testosterone and lower levels of stress hormone, cortisol. . Shake hands to connect with people. Touch is oldest non verbal cue everyone learned by any individual. In a social scenario, you convey touch through a handshake. A firm handshake leaves an impression of confidence and trustworthiness to people. . To illicit good feelings, give a genuine smile. People tend to smile back when you smile at them. No matter what they are feeling, when someone smiles at them they cannot help but smile back. A real smile will show on the entire facial expression of a person and not just on his mouth. . Listen to encourage participation. To get more people to participate focus on them and not on other things. Show that you are listening to them by turning your body to face them or by making eye contact. Employ other non verbal cues that show you are listening to them. . Remove defensive barriers to improve relationship. Take away any physical objects you may be holding or placed in front of you to make you look more open. You can improve relationship and encourage teamwork if there is nothing to obstruct you and your team. How to use body language to your advantage Now you know high level what different body language cues you can employ, it is time to learn how you can use them to your advantage. 1. Practice the power posture. Fill space and open your body. The more space you take, the more powerful your posture. Studies suggest that power postures can help boost self confidence. An example, if you are standing, stand with feet apart with your hands placed on your hips. Practice doing the power stance in front of a mirror and help boost your belief in your own abilities. 2. Be mindful of your tone of voice and facial expression. Your facial expression and tone of voice is just as important as your body movements. A smile is contagious. Even when a stranger smiles at you, you cannot help but smile back. A smile can evoke positive feelings in a person. It is the same with your tone of voice. Research suggest that when you speak in a low tone pitch, you feel more powerful. If you behave as if you really feel positive and confident, you are more likely to feel actually confident and positive. 3. Gesturing when you speak. Gesticulation is an unconscious behavior for most and others view it as a quirk but research proves that gesticulation can aid in the mental process. Can you imagine watching a presenter who just stands still? Do you think you will be impressed with the presentation? Gestures help your audience not only understand but remember what you are saying as well. The key is to make sure that your gestures are related to your words. 4. Avoid using handheld devices. A new research at Harvard University showed that people who uses laptops or desktops are more assertive than those using handheld devices like tablets and mobile phones. This is because handheld devices keeps a person in a constricted posture as compared to a bigger device where you have an open posture. Manipulative Body Language Deciphering intentional body language is easy. If someone rolls their eyes or stomps their foot will give you a good idea of what they are feeling. However, some people are good at using subtle body language to manipulate you and get what they want. Falsifying Non Verbal Communication A gesture, a movement, a smile and other gesticulations may seem normal actions to an untrained eye, but an individual’s body language maybe telling a different story than you know. Here are some common non verbal cues that people can subtly use to manipulate you: Smile A smile is a powerful non verbal cue. When a person smiles at you, your instinct is to smile back and it disarms you. What you need to observe is whether the smile is genuine or fake. A genuine smile will engage the whole face from the lips to crinkling of the eyes. A fake smile only engages the mouth. However, a fake smile will try to convey approval or pleasure but actually has a different meaning behind it. Example, when a person touches the lips while speaking maybe an indicator that he or she is lying. Mirroring Another word for mirroring is mimicking. When you are speaking with someone, watch if the person mimics your movements. Normally, when a person wants to establish rapport with you, he mimics your behavior. Example, when you take a sip of your drink, he will do the same gesture or try resting your elbow on the table and wait to see if the person will do the same. Manipulators use this technique to make you feel at ease by showing that there is commonality between you. Nodding Nodding is one of the most powerful non verbal cue that a manipulator can use to gain what they want from you. When you nod your head, it is an indication of patience or lack thereof. When a person nods slowly, it indicates the person is agreeing with you or interested in what you are saying and would like you to continue. If the person is nodding fast, it shows his boredom or has had enough and would like you to either finish or give him or her a chance to speak. The manipulator can use how you nod to leverage on how he should proceed. Standing You can get clues on an individual’s feelings or mood from the amount of physical distance that separates you. Although some people are not comfortable standing close to another person, there are those who are used to standing at a lesser distance. When a person stands very close to you indicates that he or she likes you and enjoys your company while those who stand at some distance from you feels the opposite. A manipulator will often ignore space boundaries to put you in a defensive mode without you realizing it. Leaning Leaning may seem a casual movement from a person feeling cramp but body language can tell you otherwise. Posture is hard to read because it is not easy to control but certain behavior can give telltale signs of what is really inside the person’s mind. Leaning backward on a chair or any back support when speaking with someone can indicate disinterest or boredom while leaning forward towards someone suggests otherwise. Use your feet The feet are the most overlooked part of the body when it comes to body language. People generally focus in controlling their upper body positioning and facial expression they do not realize they are unintentionally revealing non verbal cues with their feet. One good example is the direction of where the feet is pointed. People will normally point their feet in the direction of where they want to go whether they are standing or sitting down. Again, like nodding, manipulators can use the feet to their advantage. An individual with vested interest can use this technique to gain your attention. Detecting deception in Body Language You can tell a person is lying by watching his body language. Here are some non verbal cues to indicate deception: e Fidgeting e Involuntary bodily functions like growling stomach, sweaty brows, or jittery hands e Using obstructions like books, coffee cup or any other objects e Hand gestures are made after the spoken words and not before. Non Verbal Communication Body Language in Life Situations Body language is a powerful tool to enhance your social interactions, confidence, mood, and how you feel about your surroundings when used in a positive manner. Here are some tips on how you can use body language in your life situations. Body Language Tips For Your Interview If you are going for a job interview, body language can help you nail that job if you know how to use it to your advantage. Here are five body language tips you can practice before going for your next interview: e Appearance gives an overall impression so make it count. Wear appropriate clothes. Keep your hair neat and tidy and for the women, do not wear too loud make up. Keep it to a minimum. You want to give off the impression that you are confident, intelligent and reliable. e Hand Shake is most likely the only physical contact you will have with your interviewer. If you sweat a lot, make sure your palms are dry before you shake hands. Sweaty palms is a sign of nervousness. Make the handshake firm, not too tight and not too loose. When you shake hands, maintain eye contact with the interviewer and smile. e Posture and Sitting Position. Do not slump. Keep your body straight and lean a bit to show your interest. Do not recline or lean back as it is a sign of boredom. Do not cross your arms across your chest because it shows lack of confidence. Do not cross your legs so you won’t need to re cross them. Too much leg movement may come across as fidgeting. e Use hand gestures. Hand gestures are fine if you are more comfortable speaking using them but do not use them too much to the point of you getting distracted. e Eye Contact. Maintain eye contact but not constant contact. Avoiding eye contact conveys you are untrustworthy same time constant eye contact projects you as aggressive. Just maintain a balance of keeping eye contact when listening or responding then break eye contact a bit. Body Language For Seduction Using body language to seduce is probably one of the hardest to master for most people. It is not easy seducing someone without appearing “slutty” or a “player,” Here are five body language tips you can employ to let someone know you are seriously interested: e It is all about appearance. When going out with someone, try to find out where he is taking you. Wearing the appropriate dress will make the date feel less awkward. If he won’t tell, just ask if you need to wear something formal or casual. Scent also plays an important role when you are going out. Choose a scent that will not be too overpowering. Use make up that will emphasize your best features. e Lock eyes then break the gaze. Whether you are on a date, just having a nightcap or simply talking, let your gazes lock. Stare deeply and let it turn into a “flirty” staring contest, then look away or look down, parting your lips slightly. This signifies that the emotions between you two are intensifying. e Subtle Touch. Touch his arms once or twice, brush your knees “accidentally” against his; touching communicates your desire and doing it subtly will bring you up a notch in their eyes. It shows that you want more but sends of the signal of proper decorum and tastefulness. e Lean in. Leaning in is one of the strongest body language cue you can make. Leaning in conveys a possibility of a kiss. It also conveys that the person is more than just a little interested; the person is more open and vulnerable. However, be careful about leaning in to avoid head butting the person. e The kiss. This is another hard move to execute when seducing. Should you kiss the cheek or the lips? Should you even kiss at all? These questions are tough to answer especially on a first date. Best course of action is to follow your instinct and commit to it. Body Language Techniques For Public Speaking Speaking in front of an audience does not need be a terrifying experience. You have the most effective tool in your arsenal to capture your audience and be effective. Here are five body language tips you may not know you have: e Own the stage. In theaters, actors move around the stage to project a certain amount of confidence. The way you walk, stand, gesture, and speak tells your audience you are confident in the spotlight and you know what you are saying. This lends your speech more credibility. Do not overdo it; just own a certain portion of the stage instead of hiding behind a podium. e Use facial expressions. This is an integral part of body language. Your expression helps emphasize the meaning of the words you are saying. Your face should express a certain amount of seriousness if you are talking about something serious; or not remain stoic when you are delivering a joke. The audience will usually depend on your facial expression to augment the meaning of your words. e Use NODS formula. NODS stands for Neutral, Open, Defined and Strong. Start in a neutral position; hands on your side. The position will keep you open to you audience, helping influence flow both ways. Use defined or “clean” hand gestures to make them strong. If you accompany your speech with this formula, capturing your audience will be a breeze. e Use your voice. Speak in a clear tone of voice. You can alter the pitch and tone of your voice depending on the words you are using. If you are talking about something horrifying, do not make your voice sound happy. Use your voice to make your audience sympathize with you. e Use Props. Body language is not limited to physical movements. One element of body language is appearance and that includes props. Props is an effective tool when speaking in a business meeting or seminar. Today’s technology includes many gadgets and props that can aid you to get your message across strong and eloquent. Effective Body language Techniques and Tips for Teachers / the Classroom The average attention of an individual according to a 2015 research is 8.25 seconds, probably less if they are children. If you want to be effective as a teacher, you need to be ingenious in finding ways to hold the attention of your students. Here are five powerful body language tips that you can use effectively: e Anchoring. Anchoring is an NLP technique based on the classical conditioning where a biologically powerful stimulus paired with a previously neutral stimulus evokes a specific response. If you repeat the pairing often enough, the brain begins to view it as one. In a classroom, you can use a hand gesture. Say, you are teaching kids and you want them to understand the word “cat”, you can use a clawing gesture to associate with the word cat or tapping a board with a ruler and to tell them you want them to listen. Repeated often enough and soon you will not need to say the words. e The Eyes have it. The eyes can convey so much meaning, disapproval, surprise, happiness. Your eye movements can express a wealth of meaning. If you want them to look at a particular object, just direct your gaze on that object and your students will follow. If you want to show them you are serious, stare them in the eye without blinking. e Using your voice. The tone of your voice can also convey a wealth of information. The volume, melody or pitch of your voice can convey moods and emotions and heighten interest. Example if you want to teach them the difference between “loud” and “soft”, you can change the volume and pitch of your voice. You can say “loud” in a booming big voice while “soft” in a low pitch tone. e Exaggerate. If you have seen a theater play, you will notice the actors exaggerates their actions and the volume of their voice. Even the way they speak is exaggerated. This is because they are performing not just for the audience at the front; they also need those sitting at a distance. e Positive non verbal cues . You want your students to be comfortable and at ease with you; reduce the anxiety they feel and keep them motivated. They will not feel these things if they see you frowning or distant. Nod, lean in, use open palms, smile; these are body language cues designed to give positive vibes to anyone. Effective Body Language ‘Techniques for Sales and Negotiations If you noticed, the title mentioned sales first before negotiations because there is no point in negotiating if you do not have anything to sell. Body language plays a huge role in business transactions and experienced sales negotiators observe body language more than the words. Here are five body language moves you can look for: Chapter 2: Cold Reading environment includes crystal balls and tarot cards. But, did you ever think that these things are all just part of the props? Did you ever wonder how psychic readers seem to know so much about you? The truth is they really don’t know anything except what you tell them. This technique is called cold reading. What is cold reading Cold reading are set of strategies or techniques employed by psychics, fortunetellers, spiritual mediums and mentalist to manipulate their targets into believing that they know more than about the target and passing this on as a psychic ability. Manipulators and psychologists accomplish this by using various tricks that includes psychological manipulations to convince the target to reveal information about themselves unknowingly. Cold Reading Techniques Here are few common techniques that manipulators use when doing cold reading. Recapping the Target’s Information The reader should memorize all information that the target is giving him because this information will help him later. It is common for most people to forget what they said before and the reader can take advantage of this. During reading, the reader can repeat the information gathered from the target earlier and make it sound like information received psychically. The Shotgun Technique When you fire with a shotgun multiple bullets to a target, it is with the hope that at least one will hit the target. This is how the shotgun technique works. A reader throws out general information to an audience and observes their reaction. The reader will be able to narrow down on a subject based on their reaction or body language to his statement. Example, the reader can throw a general statement about a recent heartbreak or loss. There would at least be one whose mood will change or show reaction. The Blame Game Technique There are times when a reader is wrong in their reading. A cold reader should never accept that he or she is wrong. Shift the blame on the target or twist your statement to make your statement sound right. Using Barnum Statements The Barnum Effect was named after showman Phineas Taylor Barnum. In psychology, the Barnum effect refers to the gullible nature of people when reading descriptions of themselves. To a cold reader, these are statements, which appear personal or refers to a specific topic but in truth, it applies to many people. A cold reader can throw out a statement asking the audience about someone having a loved one suffer from chest complications. This can translate to various medical conditions relating to the chest or respiratory system. Response Observation Technique Observation is a great way to see how a target responds when asked direct questions. Body language is one of the best give away when trying to read a target. The way their eyes, arms, body moves and the change in their mood and facial expression on a specific statement speaks volume. This technique is most effective when performing mentalism. How to use cold reading Cold reading takes learning and practice. The reader needs to ask the right questions and learn to observe the response and behavior of their target. To do cold reading, here four things that a reader needs to remember. Modesty Is The Key Do not set a high bar for yourself to make it easier for you to surpass your target’s expectations. Your goal is to surprise and amaze your target not to disappoint them. Do not brag that you can read minds but instead be modest. Tone it down by telling your target that you can sense things when a person is troubled. Ask if the target wish for your help. Let your target know that it is up to them to piece together or make sense of the information you are giving them. You are just the medium. This transfers the responsibility to them instead of on you. After asking the target if he wishes to be read, follow this up by telling the target that it is up to him or her to make sense of the meaning of the information you will convey. Set Up Your Stage It is man’s nature to believe only what the eyes can see. This is why most psychics use props when doing their reading. Crystal balls or tarot cards are the most common props associated with psychic reading. The props usually help distract the target and very helpful to a reader when he or she is stuck. Let your target do all the talking. The more your target talks, the more useful information you can get and use during the reading. Do not interrupt them once you strike a chord. Most targets come into reading with the need to unburden themselves with whatever is weighing on their mind. If they are willing to discuss something, let them speak. The information you will gain from them are invaluable; and would help establish your “psychic” skills. Choose The Right Target Choose a target in advance and observe your target. Observe their body language. Listen to any information they might share and will be useful to you during the reading. Pay attention on your target’s mannerism and clothing. Use this to assume things about the target that you can utilize during the reading. Do not choose something obvious like telling them that they love the color pink when she is wearing an all pink outfit. Choose something less obvious like the way she touches the ring on her finger while giving a sigh. During the reading, you can say you are sensing that something is bothering her, a love problem perhaps. Maintain Confidence When doing the reading, be confident about your statements. Do not hesitate or show you doubt your statements. You will be more believable if the target can sense that you are knowledgeable about your statement. Do not falter or stutter even if you have realized your reading is wrong. Twist your words to make it seem to be the truth. Do not use specific statements but rather focus more on general statements that applies to anyone. This will lessen the chances of you being wrong. You can only use specific statements if you have first hand information on the target. Chapter 3: How to use Dark Psychology in our daily lives As described in Chapter 1 dark psychology is the psychological science and art of mind control and manipulation. It is a psychological phenomenon by which, individuals employ tactics as persuasion, coercion, motivation and manipulation to make other people do what they want . Everyday people use coercion, persuasion, motivation and manipulation either blatantly or covertly with the intention of gaining power and control over their intended victims. The manipulators use frame controls to make their targets play by their rules. What are frame controls? Frame controls are the attitudes and skills you employ to control interpersonal relationships and social interactions. It is a set of values, perspectives, and beliefs with which people base their interpretation of a specific topic, reality, and social interaction they engage in. When you have frame controls, people accept your morals, values, leadership, and presuppositions. The effectiveness of your frame controls depends on how well you use the power dynamics of social interaction. Power dynamics is the study of power negotiation between people and among groups of people and their skills in acquiring influence and social status, convert, and bend others to follow their will to reach certain goals. One area of study in power dynamics is persuasion, influence, and manipulation between individuals and within groups and one of its tools is dark psychology. Dark psychology uses the principles of persuasion, influence, and manipulation for the manipulators’ benefit but can limit and harm the freedom of their targets. There is a thin line dividing a normal individual and dark individual. Some people are more manipulative than others are while some carry stronger ethics and values. However, it is noteworthy to remember that manipulators biggest talent lies in the picking targets who are easy to manipulate. Darky Psychology applied in Daily Life Unknowingly, dark psychology happens in an individual’s daily interactions in different areas. e Dark psychology for social manipulation. This is manipulation in social settings are techniques to manipulate individual for their own benefit but harmful to their target. Techniques such as “pity play”, social scalping, feminist manipulation, and manipulative negotiations are just a few of the techniques employed by manipulators. e Dark psychology in dating. Manipulative techniques employed by the manipulator to meet his or her sexual needs to the disadvantage of the other party. The manipulator dates with total disregard to the welfare of the dating partner, at the same time exclusively seeking to make the most out of their self interest. e Dark psychology in seduction. Manipulative seduction is a continuous process from dating into a full blown relationship. During the dating stage, seduction happens to secure attachments and bonds based on mature affection on love but this is not always the case. Techniques vary from regression, judge seduction, traumatic bonding; emotional roller coaster bonding; love bombing and/or personal kinks. Dark psychology on relationships. Once relationship is formed, the manipulator tries to gain control of the partner and the relationship. Both men and women use tools to control their partner by deploying psychological and physical tools to control the partner. Dark psychology in politics. Dark psychology in politics has many layers but to make it simpler, you can group each layer into two main groups, campaign period and in office. Manipulators use propaganda techniques and political debates designed to frame opponent negatively, induce citizens to abandon individualism in favor of a collective group, and influence voters. Dark psychology in groups. Manipulative group leaders aims to reduce the power of members while they increase theirs. This in turn will make members dependent on them. Group leaders are not above framing any discordant voices as “uninformed”, “manipulative” (iron as it may seem), and “idiotic” so that they can inoculate their own “dogmas,” Dark psychology in war. Manipulators aim to unsettle or dominate enemies as a way to handicap their ability to fight back and make it resistance look futile. Throughout history, leaders won wars without any conflict by just instilling terror through “propaganda,” The use of psychological warfare instills fear and helplessness in victims and using the frame “holy war” made some of the world’s terrorist group more powerful and successful. Dark psychology in business. Business has a wide range of areas where manipulation can occur. Different frames for different areas. PR, advertising, sales, negotiations and even employee manipulation. Most prevalent is employee manipulation where the boss/company manipulates their employees into giving up their own self interest in favor of the company. These are just a few areas in life where dark psychology is applied. These areas will be discussed more in depth in the succeeding chapters. Chapter 4: Dark Psychology for Social anipulation i ’ ` Social psychology is the study of the science behind the how feelings, behavior and thoughts of individuals are influenced by implied, imagined, and actual presence of other individuals. In dark psychology, in a social setting are manipulative techniques, strategies and tactics employed for the benefit of the manipulator and cause harm to the target. Here are examples of manipulative techniques employed Manipulative Negotiation Techniques Manipulative negotiation techniques comes in various forms and if you do not know how to go around it is easy for you to become a victim. Sample Scenario Power negotiators will always choose their turf as location of their meeting because being in their turf gives them more power. Another tactic is making you chase after them by giving vague schedules or time of meeting. “Let’s meet in my office to discuss things.” “My schedule this week is tight. Let’s re schedule. Call me next week to confirm.” “I can only schedule you next Tuesday, is that ok?” Counter Buster Avoid going to their turf. Counter back with a proposed location where you are at ease and in control. You can also say it will be fair to meet midway. Do not chase too hard. If the power negotiator keeps you dangling, counter with a strategy of your own. “I can meet you Tuesday but I am thinking we can meet first before I meet another interested client I am meeting Monday.” Guilt trip Power Move Any kind of relationship needs balance. To make it work, there has to be give and take between both parties. Emotions and feelings play a huge part and without it, there can be no balance. When this happens, the weaker party resorts to using guilt tripping tactic. Sample Scenario: A wife trying to manipulate her husband to buy her a new car. “Honey, I badly need a new car. My current car is no longer reliable and might get me stranded.” “I know you received an increase from your promotion and can afford to get me the car.” “You are lucky your company gave you a company car but I have to settle for my old failing car.” The wife is setting up the husband to get her a new car by playing on his pity. She puts pressure on by telling him that he can afford to get her a new car and put her out her misery. This makes the husband feel guilty and a part of him wants to give in. Sometimes, targets find it hard to say “no” to the manipulator because they are family members or people they love. To bust this tactic: To bust this manipulative technique push back or resist with power. Acknowledge the guilt trip and call them on it. The husband can reply: “Honey, no guilt tripping.” “Yes the company gave me a car but I can only use it for business. The salary increase as you know is not that big.” “Don’t make me feel guilty. I know you are having issues with your car, but aren’t we saving for a down payment for a new house? We can bring the car to a good mechanic and have it fixed.” Direct confrontation makes the manipulator aware that you are onto his or her tricks and that it would not work. If your manipulator is a loved one, you tread carefully by pointing out that that you are uncomfortable with the manipulation but that you understand and you are willing to offer a compromise. Social Scalper In the laws of social exchange, the more people give, the more indebted you feel to them. These people are scalpers. In dark psychology, scalpers are subtle in their tactic to make you feel indebted to them. They do hordes of favors for you so that you will feel that you owe them. Usually they will say they did things for you and that they are available anytime for you and the most powerful word, “this was specially made for you,” On a small scale, this behavior looked positive but when it gets too much it turns exploitive. It can be annoying if you know you own someone something. Social scalpers plies you with more favors than you need because the more favors they give you, the more you feel indebted to them, easier for them to ask you something huge in return. When it happens, you feel the need to comply because you “owe” them. To bust a scalper: To counter a scalper, you need to play the same game back Sample Scenario: A Mother noticed her son has been doing all the household chores when he normally doesn’t. “Mom, I took the garbage out for you and wash the dishes in the sink. I did this so you can take some rest.” Now if the Mom were weak, she would feel grateful and say thank you for what her son did even if in truth he should be helping her with those chores. But a stronger Mom would make a smart reply: “That’s great son. Tomorrow I am cooking your favorite pasta so make sure you come home early.” The Mother telling her son that she will cook his favorite gave her back control and power because she gave something back to him without asking and would feel hesitant to ask something in return for doing all the chores. : Dark Psychology in Dating In a dating scenario the manipulator dates with total disregard on the well being of their target partner at the same time doing their best to maximize their own interest. The Male Dark Psychologist A male dark psychologist (or manipulator) can string a woman along without forming a relationship. He will lie about future goals and be vague about settling down. If he gives a commitment, he usually renege on it or he can pretend to be the ideal man to lower the target’s defenses and gets what he wants quicker. Here are two examples of dating games that men usually play and a ways to turn the tables on them. Showing Mixed Signals The trick involves the man showing interest at first then suddenly show either fake or real disinterest. Some men really lose interest when they see that it is not reciprocated. However, some might use this as a way to control you by making you hooked on them. Men who usually play this kind of game only has mild interest on you, already have several women in their life, too busy with their own stuff or a combination of all three. This technique is sending mixed signals to the woman. One minute he shows he had a good time and enjoyed her company, then the next he ignores her and is showing disinterest. This time he spent ignoring her leads the woman to wonder what happened or what had gone wrong until she is hooked on him and starts chasing him. How to Handle: Do not believe any promises until it happens. Words are meaningless if not accompanied by action. Just because he promised you another date, it does not mean it will happen until it actually happens. If he promised to call you the next day fine, if he doesn’t then move on and do not invest any more thoughts about him. If he does call after a long time you can beat him with his own game by telling him, “Geez, I am dating someone right now.” Wanting the Opposite Game The man pretends that he is unattainable and write you off by saying he wants someone opposite of you to make you chase him. People by nature want what they can’t have so this game works. If you have green eyes, he might say: I like women with blue eyes. If you are an actor, he might say: I only date lawyers If the female were weak, she would feel shattered but would be even more determined to have him just to prove him wrong. The chase will then start with the woman doing her best to prove she is the one. When this happens, she would be under the control of the man. How to Handle Give him back a dose of his own medicine only a bit more of a bitter medicine. If he says he likes women with blue eyes, you reply “Oh wow, blue eyes. They usually like green eyes because of the gene combination. Do you think they will prefer brown eyed men?” If he tells you he only dates lawyers, you say, “How are you supposed to meet lawyers? You don’t usually move within their circle.” The idea is to make them prove themselves to you instead of you proving your worth. Do not sound mean or bitter. Instead, make it sound as if you are genuinely worried that he will have a hard time finding those women. This will throw them off and make them think and end up proving their worth. The Female Dark Psychologist Women are no different from men when it comes to dating. They can either win or lose. They lose if the men gain their objective without receiving anything in return but they win if they get the men to do their bidding. They can do this by feigning low interest, fake rejection, and through sex just to get the men to invest on them. The first step is the “getting you hooked game,” These are games designed to get you into them. Once you are hooked, they start playing the “getting a commitment game,” These are games designed to get a commitment out of you. Then comes the “relationship power game”; designed to establish domination in the relationship. When the women do not get what they want they turn into “nasty games” that could turn the relationship toxic. Here are two samples of games women play and how to turn the tables on them. Withholding Sex The woman use sex as a bargaining chip. She would say, “I really don’t have sex on a first date but I can always make an exception.” It translates, “I will have sex with you if you give me what I want.” How to Handle If you give in to this game, you are practically telling her that you cannot get sex anywhere and sex is the only thing you want from her. Refuse. If sex is her biggest bargaining chip, look elsewhere. Hard as it may sound, but you do not need to step down to her level. Act offended and walk out (if you are in her place) or ask her to leave. Triangulation Game Yes, triad which means three. The idea is to give you a hint that if you do not make a commitment soon, she can find someone who does. She would tell you about other men who shows keen interest on her and expound on their good traits. She would not fail to tell you the good deeds these men are giving her. “Oh there’s this guy at work who keeps helping me with the new company program. Our boss paired us together to do a project and he is so patient...” How to Handle Do a reverse triangulation without looking as if you don’t really care. “Oh wow, really? Happy to hear you are getting help honey. The company also hired a new secretary to help in my work. This means we can spend more time together without worrying about work.” You just throw back that you too can have a third party in your relationship but at the same time showing her that you are more interested in your relationship with her by showing that the third party is there to help you both get closer. Chapter 6: Dark Psychology in Seduction In a relationship, both sexes find joy in pursuing their target, more so with men. The more difficult the challenge of the pursuit, the more worthwhile the rewards. Some prefer to be seduced and manipulated. However, not all seduction pursuits are positive. If the person has the “triad” personality traits, seduction can turn into a traumatic bond. Dark psychology in seduction creates bonds with the intention of inflicting psychological wounds. Here are six examples of dark psychology in seduction techniques. Regression seduction Sigmund Freud defined regression as a defense mechanism that leads to long term or temporary reversion of one’s self image to an earlier phase of development rather than face handling unwanted impulses. In psychology, regression occurs when an individual’s behavior and personality reverts to the early stages of development and behaves in a childish manner. Regression seduction is similar to DDLG or “Daddy Dom / Little Girl” roleplay in BDSM. In DDLG, one plays the role of the Daddy (Mom if female) and the other plays Little Girl (or Boy if male). The Dom is the superior in the relationship while the Little Girl is the submissive. The “little” undergoes age regression and the age depends on the time the “little” felt happy and content. Most of DDLG relationships are consensual role play to spice up the relationship. The strategy requires you to remind them of their childhood by playing the role of their parents and making them live through their oedipal dream. Example, scolding them like a parent would. Combine the scolding with an erotic component designed to seduce them into giving in to you. Judge Seduction In judge seduction, the seducer sets himself or herself up as superior, making the seduced chase for approval. The seducer can use subtle triangulation technique to create anxiety and discontent. If the seduced knows there is ongoing competition, they will try to seek ways to prove themselves to the seducer. Example, your man asked you to accompany him in their company party. He tells you “This is a formal event and the females will be wearing long gowns. I’m sure you can find something appropriate to make me proud.” If he has control over you, your normal reaction is to be defensive and try to prove to him that you are worthy to stand beside him. Traumatic Bonding Trauma bonding is comparable to Stockholm syndrome where a person is loyal to a destructive person. In trauma bonding, the superior partner uses emotional and/or physical abuse to control and keep the other partner loyal to him or her. Trauma bonding is not limited to domestic abuse, it can also happen in hostage taking, kidnapping, cult organizations, incest or child abuse and at work. Example, a stepfather having sexual relations with his stepdaughter will tell her that it is something normal, she owes him because he provides all their needs, he will buy everything she wants or use threat to force her. Another example would be a husband verbally and physically abusing his wife to punish her for her “supposed” errors or undermining her self confidence to the point that she is dependent on him. Attachment forms through the cycle of affectionate and destructive behavior by the abuser. Emotional Roller Coaster Bonding Emotional roller coaster bonding is somewhat similar to traumatic bonding except that manipulator uses emotional abuse to control. The manipulator uses a “love you hate you” kind of abuse. One moment the manipulator is very loving and sweet and the next he is demeaning and insulting. The manipulator employs yelling, triangulations, isolation, undermining self confidence, or a combination of other emotional tactics. Once down, the manipulator pacifies the target by showering her with affection and love. This makes the target feel grateful to the manipulator. The cycle continues until the target becomes attached to the manipulator, and stays waiting and hoping for the payoff, the showering of love and affection. Control Through Personal Kinks The manipulator provides the target sexual satisfaction through kinks. The target usually keeps their sexual kinks a secret and only the manipulator is aware of it. This gives the manipulator an advantage and making him or her the only person who can sexually satisfy them. This seduction technique is common in BDSM. After the movie “Fifty Shades of Gray” BDSM acceptance has increased although many who are into BDSM would disagree that the movie captured the real essence of the lifestyle. Despite the increase in acceptance, many still hide that they are into this lifestyle. Example, a Teacher who gets sexual satisfaction through spanking would not want that secret revealed. He or she would be dependent on her lover to provide the sexual kink because giving the lover full control over her. Love Bombing In a relationship, it is common for a partner (often the man) to try impressing the other partner. Dinner dates, flowers, gifts, sweet words, and other surprises are normal stuff that a man use to woo, seduce, and impress. However, when a man starts bombarding you with excessive affection, gifts, attention, flattery, praises it turns into a seductive tactic called love bombing. The key word here is “excessive,” When the person is going over the top with his affections, splurges on out of town dates, expensive jewelries and vacations, even if you just met, you should become alert. There are two types of love bombers; one is the desperate and needy love bomber who forms an unhealthy attachment to their target but tend to have genuine feelings. The other type is the sinister love bomber or the narcissist sociopath who deliberately employs strategies designed to control their target. Chapter 7: Dark Psychology In Relationships E A g d ‘ = Ms f g k UN i'e ti & After dating and all the conflicts it entails, you are now in the relationship stage. There is less conflict in relationship than in dating but now comes the biggest problem; keeping your partner hooked into you. Psychological Tools of Female Control As discussed earlier, women use three types of games to get their man. First is getting them hook game, second is getting a commitment game and lastly the relationship power game. The last being the hardest to accomplish. How do you keep them hooked into you? So how do women control men in a relationship? The top three frames that women set up to control the relationship. 1. Set up a “you are expected to provide for me” frame whereby men are expected to provide and cater to the women’s needs 2. Set up “judge frames” where men’s worthiness and value are assessed base on their ability to provide and cater to the women’s needs. 3. Set up relationship prize frame where women position themselves as the more valuable part of the relationship. In most relationships, women are the one in control. They set up the frames of reference in the relationship; what is proper and not, what is good and wrong, and what standards of behavior to be followed. Men rarely challenge these frames and end up playing by the women’s rules. To enforce the rules, women uses compliance tools on men to become the relationship lead allowing her to task him. What are these tools? Nagging and Drama Nagging works with rewards and punishments. If you are good, you are rewarded if not then you suffer the nagging wrath. Nagging is a long term behavioral changing tool and sets the priority of what is important while drama sets the priority of what is urgent. Drama becomes powerful with the use of emotions. Women use passion and emotions with the right amount of self righteousness that tells men “I am right,” Nagging combined with drama are tools of punishment and compliance of the judge power frame. Blaming and Criticism Women love using these verbal aggression tool because it puts the men on a defensive and when they do, it communicates to the women that they are guilty, confirms that he exist to serve and make her happy, and that she is totally in charge. Men are just caught dumbfounded by the outburst and the lashing and often reacts predictably. Their response from getting defensive, trying to fix the problem, make excuses, fight with them, ask the women to calm down and tries to understand the real problem. Shaming Shaming is probably the most powerful aggression and compliance tool used by women. Shame leverages the need for basic respect and worthy of love. Shame punishments includes isolation, scorn, and igniting the feelings of unworthiness. When women shames men, it attacks their manhood. It cuts them deeply, questioning their masculinity. Some of the most powerful shaming words that cripples men are impotent, weak, “pussy”, and unsuccessful. Tasking Drama, shaming, nagging, and criticism are merely tools to get to the core of how women really control men; tasking. The more the men executes the tasks the more they are likely to invest and commit in a relationship. Tasking usually starts early on in the relationship. It can be as innocent as asking you to get her a cup of coffee or maybe ask you to carry her things. Other women hold off on the tasking until their power increases. As the relationship progresses, the demands dramatically increases. It is the nature of men to chase and women assess. The hunter prey dynamics between men and women warps the mindset of men. They feel as if they hit the jackpot once the chase is over. Thus, when men finally get into the relationship, their mindset attuned to accepting the women’s demands. Males techniques for mate control Abusive men think that they have the right to control their partners. They have to right over how they think, what they should think, what they should say, and how they should act and behave. Their words is law and believe they are the only one entitled to allow and remove their partners’ freedom. This all boils down to what mindset of “Alpha Beta” roles society imposed. The Alpha male is confident, dominant, daring, doesn’t give a damn about anything. As a result, they command respect, leads, and they are independent and the Alpha male holds his frame. The Beta male is unassuming, shy, defers to others, cares deeply about others’ opinion of him, socially awkward, shy, weak, small, and unlike the alpha does not hold his frame. Most males are beta males because it is a biological tendency. Control is exercised using both psychological and physical tools like criticism, saying that their controlling behavior is for your best interest, pretending hurt by your behavior and non stop complaining. Possessiveness They employ different tactics to keep you to himself like isolation and guilt tripping. Keeping their partner isolated makes it easier for manipulators to control their partners. They usually excuse this behavior as “doing it for your good,” Entitlement Manipulators feel they are entitled to everything in the relationship. They give them freedom and only they are entitled to take it back. Manipulators feel they are entitled to have their partner even if they do not want them. They are entitled to have their partner serve and take care of them. Subtle Manipulations Control is not limited to verbal or physical intimidation. Manipulators employ mental games and power moves to control their partner. Some of these manipulative tactics include: e Blaming his sins on you. e Divide and conquer tactic, albeit turning you against family and friends. e Gaslighting to drive you insane and make you doubt your self e Keeping you out of sort with his mood swings. Power dynamics exist in any kind of relationship and it helps support a healthy relationships. Chapter 8: Dark Psychology In Politics You can be grouping politics into two phases, “campaign” phase and “in office” phase. It is difficult to separate the two because even while in office, politicians continue to campaign for the next election. However, politicians set up different frames that separates the two. During campaigns Politicians use many influencing techniques to get people’s vote and get them to back their policies despite it not being in their best interest. During campaign, politicians set the following frames: e Their opponent is unworthy and ineffective e The current state of how things are is hopeless e He is the only solution to the problem e In extreme scenarios, create an enemy and paint himself as the only person who can destroy said enemy Some of the political persuasion tactics employed: 1. Embody the nation and its values. There is no greater political tactic than convincing your voters that you represent the country and all its values. This makes them a mythic selfless personification of the nation. The power invoked using this tactic grows unmatched. The vote against him is a vote against the country and its values. 2. Create Enemies. Machiavellian politicians create enemies, not make them. When an enemy shows up, the group (the nation) tends to coalesce and forget their differences. After 9 11, the Bush capitalized on the threat of Al Qaeda and the word “terror” became the most persuasive word in the dictionary. 3. There is no I, only us. Just like in corporate manipulation, voters are encouraged to give up their self interest in favor of the “national collective community,” Politicians encourage the “We” mindset so depersonalization can start. If this continues, the “collective community” now becomes more important than the individual does. 4. Feign disinterest in power. Politicians will never show that they are in it for the power. They talk about their commitments to the people and that they are doing the mandate of the people while hiding their ambition to gain power. Once in power The politician effectively use his manipulative tactics to gain the vote of the electorate, he now goes in office. This time he sets a different frame. The frames he sets up now focuses more on the country versus the outside forces and the country owes him. The politician frames: He is the reason why things are going well The status quo is highly positive Bad things are caused by external forces Adopt ideals of “country first before self” Some of the tactics employed by manipulative politicians: 1. Instill fear and frames himself as the only savior. Take the case of Joseph Stalin. He employed propaganda to instill fear amongst the people. Art, music, and poetry were all about glorifying him. Statues and monuments of himself were erected in honor him. He set himself as a God like figure and prominent in people’s daily life making it easy to indoctrinate everyone. . Use scapegoats when things go wrong. The Covid pandemic put China in the spotlight. Some political leaders blame China for the pandemic and uses them as reason why the virus spread. However, the virus spread also because of political leaders’ inability to take immediate measures to protect their citizens. . “Great Leader” Dupe. The ultimate prize for any leader is having everyone believe that only he can do the job. When Bush created the “external enemy”, he painted himself as the only person who can lead the country to victory. Like a true commander in chief, when he visited the USS Abraham Lincoln, he flew, talked, and dress the part; earning him the highest approval ratings of any US President ever. There is nothing wrong with politics per se. Despite the fact that politics attract power hungry individuals at the end of the day, these power hungry individuals are just like everyone else; encouraged by good ideals just as much as by their darker sides. Chapter 9: Dark Psychology In Groups j À i wt i AE. ¥ Essentially, groups are divided into primary and secondary. The primary groups are those that influenced an individual’s childhood and adolescence. The primary groups mold the individual’s basic value and forging their identity. The two primary groups are family and friends. Secondary groups are larger, impersonal, less durable and unstable than primary groups. These are groups formed for the purpose of achieving common goals, solving a problem, and sharing interests. Some secondary groups include: e Political Parties e Religious Groups e Study Groups e Working Groups e Sports Clubs e Groups defending minorities. Most group leaders aim to decrease the independence and powers of their members while they gain more power and influence. Leaders employ manipulative tactics to make members more dependent on the group and eventually on them. Manipulative Group Tactics Here are a few tactics usually employed by leaders to control members. Make people’s problems appear bigger than they actually are This is a common tactic employed to make members dependent on the group and its leader. The leader will make use of exaggeration to make a simple problem appear bigger to make the member believe he is the only one who can help solve that problem. A simple example: Anne moved to a new neighborhood. The first thing she noticed is the lack of streetlight in her street while the other street blocks were well lit. She asked her neighbor whom she could talk to about requesting a light post. The neighbor informed her that there is a monthly neighborhood association meeting coming up and she can put out the request there. During the meeting, she made the request. The President, upon hearing the request made a show of making a simple street light problem into a start of a neighborhood crime watch. The President of the association started talking about what crimes can be perpetuated with the lack of streetlight and before Anne realized it, the meeting turned into planning a neighborhood crime watch, a request to City Hall for local police to do more patrol. By the end of the meeting, the simple streetlight problem turned into something bigger. In this scenario, the association President made a simple problem bigger by creating an unknown and unseen enemy. This made the association President a hero in the eyes of the neighborhood for showing them the bigger picture. From a household problem, it became a community problem. From a simple streetlight problem, it became a fight against neighborhood crime. Ridicule, disempower, or exclude discording voices The manipulative leaders want to remove all discordant opinions by framing it as “manipulative”, “uninformed”, “idiotic”, and other types of socio cultural manipulation and as a result, allow them to indoctrinate members with their own dogmas and dictates. A good example is the feminist and patriarch movement. Men promote a culture of honors that seek to introduce a culture that limits women’s sexual freedom to fight against non paternity events. Feminist movements that promotes “me too” culture that allows them to shame and destroy men and empowers them against any type of advances. Make up a big, huge enemy that can only be fought as a group Leaders create an enemy to get the group cohesive. It is instinctive for people to seek refuge from a group when they perceive a huge external enemy. Take the case of Bin Laden’s Al Qaeda group. Al Qaeda started as a jihad group who fought the invasion of the Soviets in Afghanistan. Encouraged by what they perceived as success, Osama Bin Laden created a bigger enemy by declaring war to the US. The once unknown group became a household name after the 9 11 attacks. The attacked established Al Qaeda as a force to be reckoned with. Al Qaeda used the attack to gain more followers. Fostering group’s superiority over the individual The group comes first and there is no such thing as individualism. The leaders project the group as an elite group. The leader is not above using manipulative aggressions to impose his dominance to the collective member. One good example of that is the “close door policy” of China during the Qing Dynasty. The policy projects a frame of protecting national interest. The rulers of Qing Dynasty wanted to protect the control they have over the nation as well as all its resources. Dissolving members’ ego with the group When personal ego is not satisfied with itself, it seeks to strengthen itself by identifying with a group — political party, nation, institution, sect, corporation, gang, club and other secondary social groups. Their egos dissolve as they dedicate themselves selflessly and without personal gain no matter how hard they work. They take pride and fulfillment in the success of the group. Best example of this are “suicide bombers” who are willing to sacrifice their lives for the good of the group. Remember the Times Square Bombing in 2017 where the bomber strapped a pipe bomb around his body and detonated it. There is also the “suicide bomber” of 9 11 who took thousands of lives for what they believe is for the good of their group Al Qaeda. Surprisingly, many of these so called “suicide bombers” are intellectuals but they gave up their ego for the benefit of the collective members. Fusing the group with the leader The leader embodies the group allowing him total control over its members. The group is now the leader and the leader is the group. Take the case of Charles Manson as an example. Manson projected himself to his followers as the all powerful Messiah, thus convincing them to believer that they are members of an elite group and the only solution to the world’s problems. Manson became the center of his follower’s lives, the whole reason for their existence and survival. Acting against him is acting against themselves. They follow him blindly even to the extent of committing heinous crimes. : Dark Psychology In War H9 a ` TA a >. | Perhaps there is no greater example of dark psychology in war than the legendary Trojan horse that cause the fall of Troy. In Greek mythology, Odysseus used a ruse to fool the people of Troy using the most sacred animal to the Trojans, a horse. They built a hollow Trojan horse made from a cornel tree grove saying the Greeks are leaving it as a dedication to Athena. What the people of Troy did not know was the hollow horse was filled with soldiers led by Odysseus while the rest of the Greek army made a show of burning their camp and sailing away but the truth was they were just stationed nearby. The Trojans fell for the ruse and started to celebrate. They even pulled the wooden horse inside the city. At the height of their merriment and drunkenness, the army hidden inside the horse came out while the fleet stationed nearby received a signal to return. Troy fell that night into the hands of the Greek with the use what can be termed as a psychological warfare. Dark psychology in war seeks to mentally unsettle, dominate, and instill terror in the enemy to handicap their fighting ability making resistance futile. Manipulative communication through propaganda frames the enemy as ruthless, brutal, and barbaric. Terror to Win Without Conflict Make the enemy surrender without a fight. So easy to say but is it possible? Unbelievably, it happened throughout history. Seeds of terror planted by the enemy by using “propaganda.” What is propaganda? Propaganda is a means of communication primarily used to further an agenda and influence an audience. It is not necessarily objective in view and may represent facts selectively to encourage a particular perception. Propaganda per se is not bad but during the start of the 20" century, propaganda received negative connotation because of its association in the use of manipulative approach. You can disseminate propaganda in many ways, widespread exaggerated rumor, posters, pamphlets, paintings, films, television, radio, and most recently via social media. Propaganda is a very powerful tool as seen throughout history. Genghis Khan sowed terror throughout Asia and Europe with widespread rumors of his ruthlessness and brutality as a conqueror. Although history states some of his victories were exaggerated. He encouraged the exaggeration to make it known to everyone that he is not to be trifled with. Another man who sowed terror through widespread propaganda is Joseph Stalin when he reigned dictator of Russia. Through propaganda, he created a God like personality for himself. Statues, photographs, and posters of himself were erected and placed extensively all throughout the city. Cities and streets were renamed under his name. Every art form were utilized to glorify him. He became ubiquitous in Russians’ daily life making it easy to indoctrinate them. He convinced people that he has their interest and care with his propaganda of the 5 Year plan that would propel Russia from an agricultural country to an industrial world power. Everyone who opposed him were executed and labeled traitors. This made his doctrines and policies unchallenged. His reign of terror cost Russia more than half a million of innocent deaths. Today, it continues with Al Qaeda and ISIS extremist groups. They use propaganda to indoctrinate and recruit people. Al Qaeda established their supremacy as an extremist to be taken seriously with their 9/11 attack in the United States. ISIS use a more modern approach; social media. Numerous propaganda materials are posted on Facebook making it easy for them to convey their ideologies and recruit more. The You Tube videos of ISIS beheading hostages established their brutality and ruthlessness even if some of the videos are questionable. The Nazi Stuka: Noise as Psychological Warfare The Nazi Stuka is the German dive bomber and ground attack aircraft JU 87 employed by the Germans during World War II. The aircraft is distinct with its inverted wings and its fixed spatted undercarriage. People recognizes the aircraft once they see it up in the air, but what makes it standout are the mounted sirens called Jericho Trumpet. The wailing siren became the propaganda symbol of the German victories from 1939 to 1944. The wailing siren became synonymous with “imminent danger” because the Stuka has a reputation to hit its target with accurate precision and was the cause of the fall of Poland and France during WWII. The psychological impact of the siren is enough to paralyze people into fear. Today, the Stuka’s wailing siren is used by Hollywood filmmakers as sound effects for their movies to signal impending doom. Dark Psychology on the Air Dark psychology is most effectively set up to control and influence public opinion during wartime. There are five elements needed to employ wartime manipulation: 1. The manipulator frames himself as “good” or “holy” 2. The manipulator frames the enemy as “oppressive”, “evil”, “brutal”, or better yet, “a threat” to everyone’s lives. 3. Victory is imminent because the good guys always win. 4. Everyone has a lot to gain in this war. 5. Use propaganda to hide the cost of the war like death and suffering of the innocents caught in the crossfire. The Al Qaeda became a global force from its humble beginning as an Anti Soviet jihad in Afghanistan during the 1980s under the leadership of Osama Bin Laden. Bin Laden’s vision is to create an elite force who will help in the struggle of Moslems against their own oppressors. In the 1990s, his focused changed from the local oppressors to the United States who he perceives as the bigger enemy controlling the local oppressors. Bin Laden’s greatest achievement was the 9/11 attack on the US turning Al Qaeda brand as a household name. This propelled Al Qaeda as a super force and those who adopted the Al Qaeda brand were given access to all its assets, weapons, money, expertise, logistics support, and Ivy League training on jihadist education. The biggest difference between Al Qaeda and Islamic State is that they do not kill Sunni’s for fear of alienating them but this is not to say that Al Qaeda is innocent from the deaths of many Moslems. They were just better at hiding it. Chapter 11: Dark Psychology In Business There are different levels of manipulation when it comes to business. e PR Manipulation. The company frames itself that they exist to help humanity and not to make money for its owners. e Marketing Manipulation. The company frames the brand as the best brand in the market through expert opinions, scarcity, promotion, or subliminal marketing. e Negotiation Manipulation. Employing body language techniques to get the sale. e Employee Manipulation. Using techniques to make the employees give up their self interest in favor of the company’s interest. This chapter will focus on the last level, employee manipulation. The techniques leaders use to control their employees for the benefit of the company. Corporate Manipulation of Employees There are weak leaders and there are smart leaders. The weak ones often resort to deceit and manipulation as a weapon to get what they want. They are masters at using emotional tirades to get away with things. Some are subtle in their approach but be warned that manipulation can easily reach psychopathic level. Here are some signs that your boss is manipulating you and ways to deal with it with aplomb. Master and Servant This is one of the most common technique employed by a boss to the employee. “I am the boss, so you follow my orders.” The boss often gives tasks to the employee beyond his or her scope of responsibility. The boss couch the demands with the pretext of the demand being for the good of the company and everyone in the company. How to handle The first thing every employee should learn is his or her duties and responsibilities as an employee of the company. When the boss tasks you to do something outside of the scope of your responsibilities, you have every right to say “No,” Tum it down politely but make sure that your performance on your official task is above reproach. On another hand, doing your boss small favors occasionally will not hurt you. Veiled Threat and Guilt Tripping Manipulative bosses takes advantage of employees who lack self confidence. The boss usually uses guilt tripping to manipulate the employee. “The company has done so much for you. What is a little favor compared to that.” They lay down the guilt thick. Sometimes, they use veiled threats, “The annual performance review is happening, and we are on the lookout for people who serves the interest of the company best.” How to handle When faced with a situation like this just do your job. Deal with your boss in a professional and self assured manner. Fight fair and do not play dirty just because he chooses to do so. Do all this from day one to make it difficult for your boss to force inappropriate habits. Just keep in mind that he is still your boss and due your courtesy. The Dodger One of the worst manipulators you can encounter. The dodger avoids conflicts and issues and would do anything to escape problems. They often change topics when you raise an issue to distract you. “Can we discuss this later? I have an urgent meeting that I need to attend to.” He would find any excuse to avoid addressing the issue and make you run around after him. How to handle If you have a dodger for a boss, ask him to give you a specific day and time within the week to discuss work related issues. Make the request formal such as an email. This also serves as your evidence should he renege on it. Always send him minutes of your discussion with him for reference purposes. If needed, follow up feedback and replies with an email, fax, or text. This helps protects you from potential conflicts in the future. The Blamer This type of manipulator plays underhanded tactics to manipulate. He or she would often use the employee as the scapegoat and shift the blame entirely on the employee. He portrays you as inadequate, uses subtle sarcasm when talking to you, puts you down, and other tactics to humiliate you. Example, “You know that there is a more economical way of doing things, right?” Another example, “Is this your first time to do work on this kind of project? What are you, a clerk?” How to handle Talk to your boss. Set your boundaries. Inform him that you would like to work in an atmosphere of mutual respect. Example, ask him to call you in his office privately to discuss an issue or complaint against you. Ask him to speak to you in a professional manner and avoid sarcasm and shaming. Do not let your boss’s actions affect you. Focus on the current issue and try not to get emotional. Manipulative people love stirring up your emotions. Show bravado and confidence. Once a manipulator realizes that their tactic is not getting to you, they will stop. Playing Indifferent Some manipulative boss only pays attention to what would suit him. He plays and acts oblivious and dumb to issues that can affect your performance. There are some boss who feels threatened by their subordinates and would create situations that can stall your progress. Example, if you have a recommended solution to a certain issue, he would ignore your recommendations and would often scoffed it off. They tend to bypass you when it comes to big projects and treat you as if you do not exist. How to handle There are two possible reasons why your boss behaves this way; he hates you or he wants you to suck up to him. Either reason, the best way to handle this is to speak to someone who is more senior than your boss is or you can speak with HR to discuss his treatment of you. Just be factual and do not talk trash about him. State that you feel this kind of behavior will jeopardize your performance. At the same time, make sure your performance is not sub par. In the event conflict arises, higher authorities will be aware of it and not put you in a bad light. Chapter 12: Gaslighting The term Gaslighting originated from Patrick Hamilton’s 1938 stage play entitled Gas Light. The story is about a husband trying to convince his wife that she is going insane by manipulating sounds and objects in the house and when she tries to validate them, he tells her she is being delusional. The word gas lighting refers to how the husband tries to dim the gas light in the house while pretending that it is not happening to make his wife doubt herself and her perception of the truth. What is Gaslighting? Gaslighting is a manipulative technique or a psychological form of abuse where an individual or group makes another person question his or her memories, sanity, and perception of the truth. Person experiencing anxiety, confusion, and self doubt are easy preys of gaslighting. Warning and signs of Gaslighting Gaslighters are usually narcissists. They always demand attention and everything should always be about them. If they cannot sway you, they will start to torment you. If you try to leave them, they will manipulate you to pull you back. Beware if you see some the following signs: e They project their flaws on you. e They tell you people think you are crazy or tell you that you are crazy. e They isolate you by saying your friends and family are bad influences. e They often lie even without reason. When confronted with their lies, they deny it or counter that you are being paranoid or imagining things. The intent of the gaslighter is to make you dependent on them for your version of reality. Example of Gaslighting in action Gaslighters plant seeds of doubts in the victim’s mind to disorient and confuse them so they can gain control over them. Although gaslighting happens more commonly in romantic relationships, it can also happen within a family and in your own workplace. To understand more, here are illustrations of gaslighting in action. Gaslighting in relationships Gaslighting is very common between couples who are in a romantic relationship. The manipulator would make promises that he has no plans of keeping. When you follow up on it, he would deny saying it or would probably say you understood wrong. Another example is he would tell you information that he would later on deny making you think if he really said it or not. Example, you would say, “I cooked shrimp pasta for you.” He would reply, “You know I am allergic to shrimp.” Now you would think, when did he ever told you that? Sometimes he would follow it up with triangulation technique, “My ex always remembers which food I’m allergic to.” So now on top of the doubt, you would feel guilty because it would seem that you are not giving importance to his needs. Gaslighting within family Your family is your best support system but unbelievably, gaslighting happens amongst family members. Children will naturally test boundaries set by their parents. Example, A child received a B minus in his report card, the parent will say, “This is your fault, if you had been studying this wouldnt have happened. I told you to study. You know I cannot watch over you because I am busy with work. You never listen to me.” The parent is passing on the blame of his or her shortcomings to the child. It will not help them if a parent blame them for “mucking up” or “misbehaving” instead of talking to them and teaching them the consequences of their action. Reinforcing their belief that they are not good enough will only instill fear to explore and later on stunt their growth and development. Gaslighting at workplace Gaslighting often succeeds when you lack self confidence. It is designed to confuse you so they can maintain power over you. You can also find gaslighting at your workplace. It can come from a colleague or your own boss. Almost every boss wants to maximize their staff and to do that they can use gaslighting to make you comply. Example, Your boss tells you that working overtime can lead to a promotion, so you do it but only to find that another person was promoted. You confront your boss about it and his reply, “I did not say if you work overtime you will surely get promoted. I said working overtime could lead to a promotion. Your other colleague worked overtime too; and was submitting her work before deadline.” Another example, A jealous colleague can give you a hard time by trying to undermine you self confidence. “Oh didn’t you receive the company memo? I’m sorry, I guess only few select people received a copy.” Gaslighiting Techniques Here are five most common gaslighting technique employed by manipulators: 1. Denial. This is the number one technique used in gaslighting. The manipulator will deny saying anything or pretend that events did not happen. Example. “You are being paranoid, you know that’s not true.” or “Don’t make up things.” Chapter 13: How to get what you want with NLP (Neuro Linguistic Programming) NLP, or more formally called Neuro Linguistic Programming is a pseudoscientific methodology to psychotherapy, communication and personal development created in 1970s by author trainer Richard Bandler and author linguist John Grinder. The two claimed that the neurological processes, language, and behavioral patterns gained from experience are all connected, hence the name “neuro linguistic programming,” They also claimed that the approach can “model” skills of exceptional individuals allowing everyone to gain the same skills. Further, a single session of NLP can help treat phobias, depression, allergy, psychosomatic illnesses, common cold, learning disorders and tic disorders. However, no scientific evidence exist at this time that can support the claims of NLP supporters. Reviews showed NLP has outdated comparison of how the brain works against current neurological theories. It also found flaws in its research methodology. Principle of NLP In their book How to Take Charge of Your Life: The Users’ Guide to NLP , Richard Bandler and colleagues stated, “You cannot always control what happens in life but you can always control how you deal with it.” NLP teaches, enables and empowers you to understand better the way your brain processes language and words you use and how they affect your past, your present and your future. In a nutshell, change is possible, you just need the willingness to learn and the desire to accept new ways to be with your thoughts, yourself and with others. How to use Neuro Linguistic Programming to get what you want Despite NLP being widely discredited and psychologists no longer recommends it, it remains popular to some loyal practitioners particularly in the business industry and self help world. Here are some techniques that NLP practitioners use to control other people’s minds: 1. Focused attention on subject. A professional NLP specialist focused their attention in watching your body cues like body flush, nervous tics, pupil dilation, eye movement, breathing patterns and other body language cues. The specialist can take note of these cues and determine how the subject process and perceives information. 2. Use voice roll technique. A voice roll is a patterned pace style that buries deep what you want to impart. You can do this by placing emphasis on the desired word using monotonous patterned style. This technique bypasses the conscious mind and goes directly to the subconscious. Professionals deliver the words using the pattern of the person’s hear beat; about 45 to 72 beats per minute. 3. Using Word Patterns. Skilled NLP professionals employs a specific word pattern that looks ordinary or normal but actually permissive and suggestive. Examples of these words include see that, hear this, eventually, feel free, as, now, because, means, and many others . These words are usually connected with the senses and can invoke a frame of mind like experiencing, imagining, and feeling. 4. Covert building of rapport. Skilled NLP practitioners use brutal language to strengthen suggestibility. The rapport is built by closely watching you, and subtly interpreting your body language; leaving you vulnerable. 5. Subliminal Programming. Using subliminal programming to create an anchor that would make you easy prey even to a simple combination of techniques, by saying one thing and implanting another thing in the subconscious of the victim. NLP in Practice You can practice NLP on yourself or to others as a certified practitioner. Here some tips on how to practice NLP on yourself: 1. Set your goals. Never make negative goals. Your goal should be something that you really want. Think of things you want to gain, achieve and develop instead of the things you want to avoid or lose. Be specific when making your goal. Own your goal instead of merely wishing for it. Example, if you want a partner in your life make your goal clear “Meet a special someone.” Instead, be specific and own it, “Live with my one true love.” Chapter 14: How to avoid being manipulated You do not have to be a victim of manipulation. Here are some tips on how you can avoid being manipulated: 1. Observe people. Observe people; watch how they act towards others and various situations. While it is true that everyone has a slight degree of social differentiation, a manipulator tends to be more habitual. They usually act on the extremes, rude to some and overly polite to others—or fiercely aggressive one moment and totally helpless the next. When you meet this kind of individual, the best course of action is to stay away from them. Keep your distance unless it is absolutely necessary. 2. Set boundaries. Setting boundaries for yourself is a basic defense against would be manipulators. Know what your basic rights are and use them to set your boundaries. Your rights includes: e Tosay No e Set your personal priorities e To express your own opinions, feelings, and desires e To be treated respectfully e To protect yourself e To have a healthy and happy life e To have a different opinion from others e To receive what you paid for. These rights will set your boundaries and not allow others to violate these boundaries. As long as you not inflicting harm to others you have the right to defend and stand up for yourself against anyone. 3. It is not your fault. When you feel your answers does not seem to satisfy the manipulator, never blame yourself. You have to remember that manipulators exploit your weaknesses and use them against you. There is nothing wrong with you, the manipulator aims to make you feel bad and inadequate to gain control and power over you. If this happens, remember your basic rights and ask yourself this questions: e Is this person treating me with respect? e Are his or her demands reasonable? e Is our relationship one way or two way? e Does this relationship make me feel good? From these questions, you will be able to determine if the problem is really you or the other person. 4. Counter back. Manipulators always demand from their victims and most often than not, the victims give in to these demands. When their demands becomes too unreasonable for you, counter back to see if they know they are demanding too much. You can throw back some questions to make them aware that their request is putting you at a disadvantage: e Are you telling me or asking me? e What do I get if I say yes? e Does that sound fair to you? e Do you really expect me to do that? When you ask questions like these, they become aware of the inequity of their demands and would most likely stop or back down. However, not everyone will be such as the narcissist who will ignore your questions and insist on getting their own way. When you meet this kind, use the next tip to stop the discussion and retain control. 5. Pl think about it. These words are probably the most powerful words you can utter to counter an unreasonable demand. Manipulators have a way of putting pressure on you to give an immediate answer. When this happens, buy yourself time and distance yourself from their influence. Give yourself power by saying “I will think about it.” These words now give you the power and the manipulator in a lesser degree of power. You now control the situation; waiting for your answer. This also gives you enough time to think and weigh the pros and cons of their demand and consider whether you should negotiate or altogether say “No,” 6. Say No . Saying “no” is not easy as it may sound. For some, saying the dreaded two letter word is uncomfortable while another may actually want to say yes but would like to think about it first; others just want to avoid conflict. Saying “no” is not a sign of rudeness if you say it articulately and diplomatically. You can say “no” without being rude or impolite. e If you are saying no, do not feel guilty. You do not owe the one making the request anything. e They are making the request because they need you and your influence. If you feel that saying yes can violate your set boundaries then do not give in. Remember that you have the right to say no without guilt, the right to set your personal priorities, and the right to live a happy and healthy life. e Protect your most important resource — time. If saying yes would take up time off your other priorities then be honest. You can say, “I would like to help you but I still have prior commitment.” e Take away the sting of your rejection by referring them to someone. This shows your support thus, would not think too badly of you when you say “no,” 7. Set Consequences . When a manipulator refuse to take the word “no” aS an answer, set consequences. Asserting consequence when effectively done can help you “stand down” against a manipulator. This would give him pause and could make him change his behavior. Example, “Jf you continue with this offensive behavior, I will leave (or ask you to leave).” 8. Stand up for your rights. In tip number two, you learned about your basic rights and using them to set boundaries. However, manipulators can employ bullying through intimidation and physical harm. What you need to remember is that bullies can only bully those they see as weak; if they see you are passive and compliant. Your best course of action is to stand up for your rights. Most bullies are cowards inside and when they see their victim fighting back, they would normally back down. As long as you are not harming other people, there is nothing wrong with standing up for your rights. Manipulation only happens if you allow it. Chapter 15: Dark Humor “Laughter is the best medicine.” Does this ancient proverb still works today? Humor is known to improve mood and reduce stress. After effects of laugh can slow heart rate and lower blood pressure. These are likely due to changes in the endocrine and reduced epinephrine and cortisol. A study by researchers from the University of Vienna indicates that those who appreciate dark or “gallow” humor have high level of intelligence. What is Dark Humor? Dark humor or dark comedy is a style of humor that makes light of taboo subject matters, specifically subjects regarded as painful and serious to discuss. Popular themes of this genre of humor includes violence, death, disease, discrimination, and human sexuality. Black humor covers humor that relates to a broad range of subjects but it differs from blue humor, which primarily focuses on topics like sex, bodily fluids, and nudity. Often, the term “gallows” humor is associated with black humor but the former tends to focus on humor about situations about death or about death itself. Surrealist theorist André Breton coined the term “black humor” in 1935, in accordance of his interpretation of Jonathan Swift’s writings. In his book, Breton credited Jonathan Swift as the creator of black humor that arises from skepticism and cynicism. In American literature, the first writers to include black humor in their works were Vladimir Nabokov and Nathaniel West but it was not until 1965 that the concept of using gallows or black humor garnered nationwide attention with the publication of the paperback anthology “Black Humor,” A study was published in the journal “Cognitive Processing” on 156 subjects presented with 12 cartoons that features gallows humor featuring dark subjects like death, handicap, deformity, disease, and war. The test measured the subjects’ attention in non verbal or verbal forms with moods and aggression levels. The result showed subjects who liked the cartoons are well educated, have high level of intelligence and displays low levels of aggression and mood swings. Those who did not appreciate the gallows humor in the cartoons have opposite traits. Examples of Dark Jokes 1. My old aunts always tease me every time a sibling or cousin gets married. “Well Debbie do you think you will be next?” I started asking the same question to them during family funerals. The teasing stopped. 2. Patient: Oh Doctor, I think I have Alzheimer’s. Doctor: What makes you think you have the disease? Patient: What disease? 3. A lawyer who has a doctor for a girlfriend was hoping to get her to cook for him. Lawyer: “Honey, they said that a way to a man’s heart is through his stomach.” Doctor: “Oh really? Personally, I find it easier if I go through his ribcage.” 4. Woman: I want a divorce! Man: We made a vow in church to remain together until death do us part. Woman: Yeah, you’re right. Oh well then, just drink up the coffee I made for you. 5. Son: “Mom! Mom! Dad hanged himself in the garage!” Mother: “What??!!” Son: “Gotcha! It’s April’s fool! He hangs in the attic.” 6. A little girl ran happily to her Dad. Little Girl: Daddy, daddy guess how old I will turn next month. Dad: Oh I don’t know, why don’t my smart little Princess tell me. The little girl held up four fingers and gave a huge smile. Four hours later, the police are now with them but she still refuse to say where she got the fingers. 7. A couple made an announcement in a family gathering, “My wife and I have decided not to have kids. If any of you does, please let us know and we would be happy to drop them off tonight.” 8. Aman to a sales clerk, “Do you have an anniversary card that says, “Happy Anniversary to my one and only” ?” The sales clerk says, “Yes. How many do you need?” 9. The grandmother of a friend died. I went to attend the funeral but only found my friend, no grandma so I asked, “Where is your grandmother?” My friend replied, “I took her to the fish spa.” I was aghast, “What! Why did you do that?” He replied, “The fish spa only charges 50 dollars to eat dead skin, the cemetery charges more for burying her.” 10. A woman in labor is moaning in pain. The tries to ease her pain with words. “I’m so sorry you have to endure this honey.” The woman replied, “Oh don’t worry, it is not your fault.” 11. A priest asked a criminal sentenced to die of electrocution, “What is your last request?” The criminal replied, “Can you hold my hand as I die?” 12. Girlfriend: I was once a Christian. Boyfriend: What! We are finished. I’m breaking off with you. Girlfriend: How can you be so judgmental? Boyfriend: I’m not but I can only love you as Christhie. 13. Customer: Can I have a box of condoms please. Sales Clerk: That will be $4. Would you like a bag with it? Customer: No need, she’s really gorgeous. 14. A Zookeeper heard three kids arguing near one a lion enclosure. He got concerned so he decided to approach them. He asked them to introduce themselves and tell him what they are doing. First Kid: I’m Johnny. I’m just trying to feed biscuit to the lion. Second Kid: I’m Kimberly. I’m also trying to feed biscuit to the lion. Third Kid: I’m Biscuit. 15. My doctor informed me I have 6 months to live. In anger, I shot him dead. I was sentenced 15 years in prison. Problem solved. Conclusion Most individuals do not like revealing their dark side. The dark side of the human psyche is something that you bury deep inside you and that you sometimes do not know you are exhibiting. However, embracing your dark side can open doors to fulfillment and “enlightenment,” In her book “The Dark Side of the Light Chasers” , author Debbie Ford said your dark side is part of your totality as an individual. If you embrace both your good and dark side, you become whole. How to Analyze People The Ultimate Guide to Speed Reading People through Body Language, Facial Expressions & Learning to Decode Personality Types, Motives, Emotions , Intentions and Behaviors By PSYCHOLOGY ED ACADEMY & CARL GOLEMAN Contents — How to Analyze People Introduction Chapter 1: What is Personality? What are the characteristics of personality? But how does personality develop? What do the type theories say? Introvert Vs. Extrovert: A Look At The Spectrum And Psychology Somatypes by William Sheldon Type A and Type B Personality Keirsey Temperament Sorter Takeaway Chapter 3: The Impact of Culture Takeaway Chapter 4: Analyze Personal and Social Aspects Health Appearance Strengths And Weaknesses Beliefs & Values Demographics Environment The Person Lives In Wealth / Financial Status Social Background Chapter 5: Behavior Analysis Establish a baseline Ghee any. deviati ns | from the base ine Passi e Ageessve Chapter 9: How to Spot Insecurity, Bullying Too. Sexual Other aan of Inse curit A F TTE Lis Sociopathic Liars Chapter 12: How to Spot and Read Lies In People and Detect The Mouth Posi ive Body Lan FF age Bodv_Lan Langu age Du EA E Public Speaking sotiations And Sales ere is} een Communication n Style? Conclusion Introduction Personality comes from the Latin word “persona.” This Latin word, however, is more closely associated with putting a front or wearing a mask. Our personalities, on the other hand, are more than just about playacting for other people. Instead, they are the conglomeration of our most consistent behaviors. They provide insight as to how unique we are and as to who we really are. Who we are as a person affects how we see the world and how other people see us. How other people portray themselves is also just as vital to the brew. It is not only what you give that affects the results, but also how it is received. Some people just have the right chemistry. When they meet, they click right away. It may be that their personalities are similar, or it may be that one is complementing the other. This book aims to provide you with enough scientific knowledge to read and analyze people in diverse scenarios. You will identify how your personality can affect how you deal with other people. Similarly, you will learn how other people’s personality affects how you communicate with them. Copyright, Legal Notice and Disclaimer Copyright 2020 All rights reserved In no way it is legal to reproduce, duplicate, or transmit any part of this document in either electronic means or in printed format. Recording of this publication is strictly prohibited and any storage of this document is not allowed unless with written permission from the publisher. All rights reserved. The information provided herein is stated to be truthful and consistent, in that any liability, in terms of inattention or otherwise, by any usage or abuse of any policies, processes, or directions contained within is the solitary and utter responsibility of the recipient reader. Under no circumstances will any legal responsibility or blame be held against the publisher for any reparation, damages, or monetary loss due to the information herein, either directly or indirectly. Respective authors own all copyrights not held by the publisher. Legal Notice This book is copyright protected. This is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part of the content within this book without the consent of the author or copyright owner. Legal action will be pursued if this is breached. Chapter 1: What is Personality? So, you blew up one day at work. Everyone was shocked. Your voice was loud, and there was an apparent attempt to sputter out a curse word or two. Somehow, you managed to hold yourself back. Does this mean that you have an explosive personality? No. It doesn’t. The fact that people were stunned that you did that says it all. Personality relies on a pattern. It is consistent. If you have a habit of screaming every afternoon when you get stressed out at work, then that must be part of your personality. There is also a strong chance that you could get fired. So, what is personality, really? Personality refers to a pattern of thought, emotions, and actions. It also becomes a trademark of yours. People who know you best can already expect what you will do next. If you are an unpredictable person, other people will expect you to regularly surprise them. So, do you only see personality through the way you behave? That is only part of that. Your thoughts, feelings, and tendencies all fall under your character. A sly person, for example, can continue changing their outward behavior. However, his pattern of thought will remain the same. People who have been keenly observing him can also detect the attempts at deception. What are the characteristics of personality? Some of these characteristics have been mentioned when we were attempting to define personality just a bit earlier. One of the things that should remind you about personality is that it is consistent. You have probably heard about the term “character development.” Film viewers and book readers appreciate seeing this in characters. Does it mean that the characters have become inconsistent with their personalities? No, they haven’t. In fact, when these characters do become inconsistent, the readers and viewers feel offended. They believe that the creator does not really understand his characters because even when they do go through some form of development, there is usually a strong reason that can be backed by their personalities. Two, personality is backed by not only a person’s psychological aspects but also his biological or physical characteristics. Behaviors, for example, can be affected by biotic processes. This is why patients with psychological disorders get prescribed with drugs that target neurotransmitter function. Changing how something works within the body somehow changes behavior. Three, personality is not just a little influence on how you act, but it may cause you to behave a certain way. It is not like someone is whispering in your ears to make you do something. Instead, it is you acting a certain way because it is how you are driven. Four, you can express personality in many ways. Some will read your character through the way you talk or how you barely talk. They may see it in your actions, hear it in your selected words, and more. But how does personality develop? No matter how many types of personalities are there that try to categorize you, your character is still unique. There is likely a part of you that provides you a certain slant. After all, everyone has been born to different sets of parents. Even those who share parents differ in age, environment, set of friends, physical health, etc. You can even spot variations between identical twins. Various psychoanalysts had provided their theories on how personality develops. Sigmund Freud focused on psychosexual stages of development. Each stage focuses on an erogenous zone, which has some role to play in the child’s development. A failure in any of these stages can result in fixation. Meanwhile, Erik Erikson cited eight psychosocial stages. He was more interested in how children’s social interactions contributed to their development of ego identity. Though Freud and Erikson might have varying focuses, they both understood the importance of each stage in the development of a healthy personality. Abnormal interactions in any of the levels can cause some problems in the child’s psyche. So, both of them would agree that whatever you expose a person in his childhood will have an effect on the development of his personality. What do the type theories say? Type theories basically group everyone into categories, thus basically saying that everyone belongs to a limited set of types. One such theory groups everyone into four types: A, B, C, and D: Type As are regarded as work and achievement obsessed people who want perfection in everything. They can be competitive and aggressive when something or someone serves as an obstacle to their goals. Type Bs are almost the opposite because they don’t stress themselves too much. They are evenly tempered but have the tendency to become slackers. Type Cs seem to be less aggressive versions of Type As. They are perfectionists and conscientious, but they are not as comfortable with revealing how they feel. Type Ds are your gloom and doom troopers. They do not believe in themselves at all and would rather stay away from other people. Even traits have their unique theories: Theories often touch upon how personality is formed through genetically induced characteristics. Some people are agreeable. They easily connect with other people because they have some empathy for them. Of course, you can note of people who are at the other end of the spectrum — those who find it challenging to deal with other people. Some are even entirely disagreeable. Some people are conscientious. They have goals, and they know how to work towards those. They can be relied upon. On the other end, we have people who simply do not think of the results of their actions. Another trait that people are judged upon is their being eager to please . These are people who want to conform and to be able to deliver what is expected. Again, not everyone is like that. Extraversion versus introversion has been commonly discussed nowadays. Some people are more friendly and gain their strength from their external communications, while others have to be alone for some time to regain the energy they have lost interacting with others. People are also checked for neuroticism. They tend to feel anxious all the time and can get upset quickly after being exposed to stress. Neurotic people may have been exposed to stressors during their vital developmental stages. Open people are ready to explore new things. They are more creative and willing to take on surprises along the way. Of course, people are combinations of the above. Again, every one of us is unique. So, we are a combination of many aspects, affected not just by genetics but also by our environments and other experiences. Psychodynamic Theories The psychodynamic theories of Sigmund Freud and Erik Erikson have been previously mentioned. New theories that fall under this category are still largely influenced by Freud’s dependence on what the unconscious mind does to our personalities. Freud and Erikson both refer to stages in development that we could refer to when analyzing present behavior. It is no wonder that subsequent psychodynamic theories follow Freud’s own. It was Freud who first recognized how the unconscious affects the way people behave. Psychodynamic theories also divide personality into three parts: the id, ego, and superego. The id refers to the genetic components of personality. It includes the Eros (sex/life) and Thanatos (aggressive/death) instincts, which are intrinsic to the person. The ego develops to help you align yourself with the world’s expectations. The superego makes use of the society’s morals, which they learn from their parents as well as other people, especially close mentors. The id and the superego are both unconscious parts of your mind. They usually battle against your conscious mind, which is your ego. These conflicts may make you anxious. So, the ego may end up taking out some defense mechanisms. Behavioral Theories According to behavioral theories, your personality is the sum of your interactions with your environment. Only your observable behaviors are included in these studies. So, your thoughts may not factor in. You may say that this goes against the description of what a personality is — and you are right. However, scientists have been trying to find a way to get a tangible assessment of people’s behaviors. If you are in the academe, you will notice that the names of behavioral theorists are familiar. The likes of B. F. Skinner and John B. Watson have become a veritable part of teaching and discipline. Learning is observed through observable behaviors and patterns. Of course, teachers will not be able to read the students’ minds to see if their thoughts somehow surpass what they are showing via the application of their knowledge. Humanist Theories There are also the humanist theories in personality to consider. Here, there is an emphasis on how each person faces his environment and responds to it through his own free will. Carl Rogers emphasized self actualization. So, an individual knowingly contributes to the development of his personality. Rogers believed that each person begins to have a concept of who he is. So, he starts responding to continuous stimuli according to how he sees himself. Abraham Maslow also believes in self actualization. He formulates a hierarchy of needs, with physiological demands placed right at the bottom of the pyramid. So, breathing, eating, sex, excretion, and other processes that are required for survival fall under this section. A step above this is Safety. Here, we see employment, resources, morality, and more. Love and belonging go after that, encompassing family, friendships, and sexual intimacy. After achieving these, a person can start looking out for his esteem. After that, he may say that he has finally reached the pinnacle of the hierarchy — at self actualization. While Rogers and Maslow present pretty compelling stuff about personality, their studies are not considered rigorous. In fact, some even say that these studies do not have empirical evidence. Despite this, people do like the idea of each individual having some say in how he can finally achieve the best of himself. Humanistic theories do not leave people in fatalistic views of what life could be. Introvert Vs. Extrovert Tests, such as the Myers Briggs test, have been formulated to gauge whether a person has introverted or extroverted tendencies. Isabel Briggs Myers co authored the personality inventory with her mother, Katharine Cook Briggs. The questions were said to have been formulated with Carl Jung’s theories in mind. Jung conceptualized that people’s behaviors depend on four psychological functions: sensation, intuition, feeling, and thinking. Through these primary functions, and a person’s introversion or extraversion, the Briggs Myers test can identify 16 distinct personalities. The Briggs Myer test identifies 8 variations of introverts. As mentioned earlier, these are people who lose a lot of energy when they have to mingle with other people. They need time to be alone to reenergize. It does not mean that they will hide from others all the time. They usually are more in touch with their inner thoughts. Introverts excel in observing other people and knowing just what to do in every situation. It does not mean that they will be comfortable with any of those possible actions. The test also identifies 8 types of extroverts. Extroverts are more comfortable with socialization. They will more likely blurt out what they have been meaning to say all along. Extroverts excel in being able to form networks to connect with more people. Chapter 2: Personality Types Theories and Assessments Methodologies People are all different. We know that just by observing others. However, psychologists continue to find means to categorize behaviors. We have to admit behaviors and personalities are complex and compelling. Wouldn’t you want to know how come other people think one way, while others have their own take of the same thing? Introvert Vs. Extrovert: A Look At The Spectrum And Psychology In Chapter 1, we have already looked at how people are divided into introverts and extroverts. Put simply, introverts gain energy when they are alone. They lose a lot when they are dealing with other people. So, no, they do not totally eschew other people’s company, but they get raggedly tired when they have to socialize. On the other hand, extroverts recharge when they are with other people. They thrive in the buzz and energy of others. These extremes may sometimes confuse some people who feel as if they are neither one nor the other — or perhaps even both. This is why some personality assessments address the existence of a spectrum. You may say that some people are more introverted than others. Some may have strong introverted qualities but can still be convinced to participate in regular parties — if with close friends. On the other hand, some extroverts may also feel relieved about getting some needed rest from social activities. Northwestern University’s Dr. Dan McAdams recognizes introversion extroversion as one continuous dimension. There are gradients, instead of sharp delineations, between the closest subtypes. This is because each regular person takes some characteristics from both the introverted and the extroverted qualities. Even at the workplace, the differences can be sensed. Extroverts, for example, love the hustle and bustle of a packed schedule. They do not mind being sent to various places or asked to meet new people. Being relegated to the desk job frustrates and bores them. So, they end up not doing much that was expected of them. Introverts are their polar opposites. Noise and ever changing schedules frazzle them. So, they get easily distracted by these. They would instead prefer working in a stable and mellow environment, wherein their plans are clear, and the setup is pristine. Then, somewhere cut between the introverts and the extroverts come the ambiverts. Ambiverts possess a combination of features from introverts and extroverts. Somatypes by William Sheldon If you have conducted any sort of research on exercise and nutrition, then you may have come across the various body types: ectomorph, mesomorph, and endomorph. Most of us, however, would not think of these body types beyond what they can help us in terms of the right exercise and diet methods. William Sheldon, however, had successfully conducted research on these body shapes to relate them to personality traits. An ectomorph is described as someone with a lighter body type. He has less defined muscles and lighter bones. He may be described as slim and may seem taller than he really is. Somehow, their personalities also reflect this “lightness.” Ectomorphs are known for being more emotionally sensitive. A mesomorph, on the other hand, has a balanced combination of muscle and bones. People with well defined muscles that seem to suggest a regular workout fall under this category. There is a strong possibility that he may not even be doing any workouts. Muscle building and success in physical activities come naturally for the mesomorph. Just as his body can be sturdy, the mesomorph’s emotional perseverance can also be noted. This capacity for emotional strength and endurance can be observed more when contrasted with the ectomorph. Finally, the endomorph has a soft and round body. He gains more weight in the abdominal area, while his hands and feet are comparably small. Endomorphs are generally regarded as fun and sociable. While the above may seem to make sense to you because they reflect the body type and personalities of people you know, not everyone can be easily classified. Most people will still end up a combination of the three body types and their equivalent characteristics. You may even find some people going against type, especially if you cannot easily describe their body structure. Type A and Type B Personality Then, we go back to Type A and Type B personalities. We have glanced at the comparison of these two leading personalities. Type A personalities refer to people who have a cutthroat way of getting what they want. They are ambitious and can be very hard on themselves. Because of this, they can hardly relax. Instead, they like pursuing various goals. Type As are competitive and very focused. However, they may get frustrated when plans do not go their way. Type B personalities are more relaxed. They can be so laidback that other people may think that they are not capable of achieving success. They are. However, they may take a more casual route. This may be good for stress, but not necessarily for tight schedules and strict work schemes. Procrastination may be their primary enemy. Type A and Type B personalities develop because of several factors. Genes may be a cause. Of course, the upbringing of the family may have a powerful influence. After all, a person brought up in a Type A family may more likely manifest the same characteristics. Type Bs can also be inherited or passed on. What you see in your environment as a child will make a significant mark on you. Both types have their pros and cons. The driven type A will hurtle towards his goal no matter what. He will make sure that what needs to be done will be done. However, because of their strict regard for rules and targets, they may not work that well with others. They may also be more likely to develop stress related health conditions. On the other hand, relaxed type B will provide a comfortable and easy going atmosphere, which team members will appreciate. He just needs to have more driving force to get the goals done. With less stress, type B can be less prone to cardiovascular illnesses but should know when he should apply himself to succeed. Whatever the case may be, we mustn’t judge anyone based on his personality type. Myer Briggs 16 Personality Types And Indicator (MBTI) The Myer Briggs personality test has become pretty prevalent because of social media. 16 distinct types have arisen from the general types (introversion and extroversion) and some distinctive traits. Each of these MBTI types is represented by four letters. The combinations all come from the following: I — Introvert E — Extrovert S — sensing N — intuiting T — thinking F — feeling J — judging P perceiving ISTJ ISFJ INFJ INTJ Inspector Protector Counselor Mastermind Doing What Should|| A High Sense of || An Inspiration to || Everything Has Room Be Done Duty Others for Improvement ISTP ISFP INFP INTP Crafter Composer Healer Architect Ready to Try Sees Much But Performing Noble || A Love of Problem Service to Aid solving Shares Little Society Anything Once ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP Promoter Performer Champion Inventor The Ultimate xou Only “0 Giving Life an Extra ne ; Around Once in Challenge After Realist Squeeze Life ESFJ Another ENTJ ESTJ ENFJ Supervisor Provider Teacher Fieldmarshal er Hosts and . Life a Hostesses of the Smooth talking Life's Natural Leaders Administrators World Persuader ISTJ — “The Inspector” The Inspector is an introvert. So, it goes without saying that Inspectors are quiet and reserved. However, because of the unique combination of Introverted Sensing Thinking Judging, they are mainly known for being great planners. They are also very observant. However, this type is not without its fault. The Inspector can be quite judgmental and may be insensitive. In their quest to be focused and organized, they may blame others when things are less than perfect. Examples of Suitable Careers: e Accountant e Computer Analyst/Programmer e Dentist e Detective e Doctor e Librarian e Lawyer ISTP — “The Crafter” The Crafter may not be as expressive as extroverts, but they are creative. They are also fond of taking on new experiences, which goes against the usual concept of what an introvert is. Crafters like risky activities, but they try to stay away from their own emotions, a tricky balance achieved while also expressing themselves well. They also try to stay away from other people’s emotions, a surprise coming from an introvert who is supposed to have more insight into these situations. The self confident Crafter is challenging to pin down in terms of reading their emotions and getting them to commit. Examples of Suitable Careers e Computer programmer e Carpenter e Electrician e Engineer e Firefighter e Forensic scientist e Mechanic e Pilot e Police Officer e Scientist e Software engineer e Video game designer ISFJ — “The Protector” Reliable and warm hearted, The Protector remembers so many details about others to make them feel special. They are traditional and practical, and may generally seem old fashioned. Because of their traditional values, a Protector has provided himself the task of looking out for others. Sometimes, this becomes detrimental to their own well being. While they may be introverts, they are rooted in reality. Examples of Suitable Careers e Accountant e Administrator e Banker e Bookkeeper e Child care provider e Counselor e Nurse e Office Manager e Paralegal e Social worker e Teacher ISFP — “The Artist” Artists may be introverts, but they do not like worrying about the future. Instead, they would rather take care of the Now. So, they are “doers,” solving problems right away instead of worrying about what to do with them. These easy going introverts would rather get some practical things done instead of daydreaming. While mingling with other people takes away a lot of their energy, they do enjoy the outdoors and interactions with animals. Examples of Suitable Careers e Artist e Chef e Designer e Forest ranger e Musician e Nurse e Naturalist e Pediatrician e Psychologist e Social worker e Teacher e Veterinarian INF J — “The Advocate” The idealistic Advocate needs some time off from people, just like other introverts. However, they do enjoy helping other people and making a difference in the real world. When they do make decisions, they still rely a lot on their personal opinions and feelings over objective facts. Despite this, they do drive away any tendencies to daydream because they take charge through organizing and planning. Examples of Suitable Careers e Actor e Artist e Counselor e Entrepreneur e Librarian e Musician e Photographer e Psychologist e Religious worker e Teacher e Writer INFP — “The Mediator” The Mediator has a way of looking at the big picture. Unfortunately, this perspective makes them lose their sight of the little details. A bundle of contradictions, the Mediator is great at fostering close relationships but is challenging to get to know. Moreover, they care a lot about other people but still prefer to work alone. Someone who is a mix of seemingly clashing characteristics would make for a good mediator or middle person. Examples of Suitable Careers e Artist e Counselor e Graphic Designer e Librarian e Psychologist e Physical Therapist e Social Worker e Writer INTJ — “The Architect” The hard working Architect is willing to discuss theoretical concepts. In fact, he enjoys the challenge of getting into them. He is good at listening to other people, even to the point of being open to constructive criticism. The Architect wants to feel in control. So, he makes his plans in advance and depends on objectivity rather than feelings. Examples of Suitable Careers e Dentist e Doctor e Engineer e Judge e Lawyer e Mathematician e Scientist e Teacher INTP — “The Thinker” As the name suggests, the Thinker lives in his thoughts. However, this does not mean to say that he does not know how to live beyond that. He can be very affectionate to his family and friends. This powerful abstract thinker is good at analyzing raw data and conceptual ideas. However, because of the pull of his inner world, some may misunderstand him and believe him to be insensitive. He can be insensitive, too, for real but he can also be riddled with self doubt. Examples of Suitable Careers e Chemist e Computer programmer e Engineer e Forensic scientist e Geologist e Mathematician e Pharmacist e Physicist e Software developer ESTP — “The Persuader” From the very name of this personality type, the Persuader knows a thing or more about influencing others. He is adaptable and resourceful. So, he knows how to change his ways to suit the situation and the person he is talking to. He does this by being observant. However, the Persuader can also get bored very quickly. He is used to getting a lot of action done and does not like a lull amid the proceedings. Examples of Suitable Careers e Computer support technician e Detectives e Entrepreneur e Marketer e Paramedic e Police officer e Sales agent ESTJ — “The Director” The Director has a take charge way of handling things. He is very traditional with his approach. He has strong leadership skills, as suggested by the name, but he can also act put his money where his mouth is. Why? The Director is a hard working and reliable person. So, he just expects other people to be the same. Other people may not see eye to eye with him because he can be quite frank and argumentative. Some people may even describe him as bossy. Examples of Suitable Careers e Accountant e Banker e Business manager e Judge e = Military e Police officer e Politician e School administrator e Teacher ESFP — “The Performer” The Performer is often easy to spot because he is the entertainer or even the class clown of every group. What people may misunderstand about him is that he is not always doing it just for the attention. Performers genuinely enjoy engaging with other people. Their brimming optimism about life is what makes them a lot easier for them to be sociable. These spontaneous people always need stimuli, or they will quickly get bored. Performers live for today, but do not plan for tomorrow. Examples of Suitable Careers e Actor e Artist e Athletic coach e Counselor e Fashion designer e Human resources specialist e Musician e Psychologist e Social worker ESF J — “The Caregiver” The Caregiver is the extroverted version of the Protector. This outgoing version of the ISFJ gains pleasure from helping other people. They are dependable and organized, which allows themselves and their cause. However, because of their efforts to sense and provide people’s needs, they also have a tendency to want to be recognized. They genuinely want to help, but also seek the approval of others and can be quite needy in their quest for this. Examples of Suitable Careers e Bookkeeper e Childcare Provider e Counselor e Nurse e Office manager e Physician e Receptionist e Social worker e Teacher ENFP — “The Champion” Champions are a creative and gregarious bunch. They strongly empathize with people and have the communication skills to back them up. A Champion manages to combine his love for fun and his caring attitude. So, he is not just out there to live his best life, but he is concerned about others doing the same. However, he also has the tendency not to follow the rules. Stress can quickly frustrate him, which cannot be helped by his disorganized ways and overly emotional stance. Examples of Suitable Careers e Actor e Counselor e Journalist e Nurse e Nutritionist e Politician e Psychologist e Social Worker e TV Reporter ENF J — “The Giver” If you want to meet the ultimate people person, then it would be the Giver. The Giver has a broad social circle, and he freely engages with its members. He is warm hearted. So, it is typical for the Giver to encourage people he has some influence over. Yes, he does have an easy way of influencing people, which is tempered by his desire to sacrifice himself for others. Because he absorbs emotions as he communicates with contacts, he can be overly sensitive and seek the approval of others. Examples of Suitable Careers e Counselor e Human resources manager e Manager e Psychologist e Sales representative e Social worker e Teacher ENTP — “The Debater” The social web that The Debater spins is reliant on the pursuit of knowledge. He interacts with others to exchange knowledge and intellectual conversations. He enjoys a good debate of ideas, thus the name of this personality type. However, when he gets caught up in his views, he can be argumentative and insensitive to other people’s opinions. He does not like other people controlling him and his schedules. Examples of Suitable Careers e Engineer e Inventor e Journalist e Lawyer e Psychiatrist e Psychologist e Scientist ENTJ — “The Commander” Finally, the 16 Myers Briggs personality types conclude with The Commander. The name suggests that this type is in no way in the last place for anything. The Commander is a born leader. He comes with strong communication skills and the assertiveness that is needed in an effective leader. The Commander has a sense of organization and decisiveness that can carry the whole team towards success. However, he needs to be more sensitive and more patient for the venture to be a serene team effort. He also has the tendency to be aggressive and stubborn. Examples of Suitable Careers e Business analyst e CEO e Entrepreneur e Human resources manager e Lawyer e Scientist e Software developer e University professor The 9 Enneagram Personality Types Another way of looking at personality is through the 9 Enneagram Personality Types. Some may opt to choose the Enneagram to understand themselves or other people. However, it is not unprecedented for people to dig deep and explore both the Enneagram and the MBTI. The official Enneagram test, as of writing, costs $12 for a one time take. It will provide the test taker the number that represents his Enneagram personality types. The numbers go from 1 to 9. The Enneagram 9. Peacemaker Mediator 1. Reformer Perfectionist 8. Leader Challenger 7. Enthusiast 2. Helper Epicure Caretaker 6. Loyalist 3. Achiever Questioner Performer 5. Thinker 4. Individualist Observer Tragic Romantic The Geometric Symbol of the Enneagram Personalities After you have gotten your results, you can check what your Enneagram meaning means: 1: The Reformer The Reformer is described as ideological. He usually serves as the moral compass, with his self controlled ways and tendency to be perfectionistic. 2: The Helper The Helper tends to lean towards people pleasing and being generous to others. He just needs to temper his tendency to be possessive, as well. 3: The Achiever The Achiever is always aware of his progress and status. So, he is driven to excel, adapt, and maintain his image. 4: The Individualist The Individualist is a sensitive and dramatic type. He can be very temperamental and prone to self absorption. 5: The Investigator The Investigator is secretive, cerebral type. He can be quite intense but can work alone because of his powers of perception. 6: The Loyalist The Loyalist is concerned about where commitment lies. He is so focused and security and loyalty that he is suspicious that others may not be the same way. 7: The Enthusiast The Enthusiast is fun loving and sees the good in everything. Unfortunately, he can also be quite distracted and scattered. 8: The Challenger The Challenger has an overpowering self confidence. He uses it to be willful and decisive in his own goals. However, he can also use this to be confrontational. 9: The Peacemaker The Peacemaker will agree to just about anything to maintain the peace. He is very receptive to other people’s emotions and will provide a reassuring voice to others. Myer Briggs Vs. Enneagram: Key Differences Now that you have seen both the MBTI and the Enneagram, you can see that they categorize people into types. Each type has a distinctive set of characteristics. Now, what about the differences between the two? Nature versus Nurture Don Richard Riso and Russ Hudson have formulated the Enneagram with nurture in mind. For the Enneagram types, they can even point out from which parent the person has gotten his characteristics. Riso and Hudson believe that personalities emerge based on children’s early experiences. On the other hand, the Myers Briggs personalities stem from Carl Jung’s theories. These personalities are more rooted in nature. It is believed that people are born with those personalities and continue to develop them as they grow up and gather more experiences. Negative Traits Both the Myer Briggs and the Enneagram describe negative traits. Myer Briggs always mentions the weaknesses of each type. It also cites an inferior set of attributes, which refer to characteristics that are not very commonly associated with the category but would be worth exploring and bringing to the fore. The Enneagram, on the other hand, introduces the 9 personalities together with their central vices. Analytical versus Holistic Because Jung is analytical, the Myers Briggs personalities take on a more structured setup. Each of the 16 personality types makes use of one of each of the four dichotomies that the MBTI uses. So, each type has a lot of details. On the other hand, the Enneagram is more holistic. Instead of a structured definition, each Enneagram type is assigned a highly known title that everyone has a clear notion about. For example, the Achiever calls into mind various driven people and what they usually do to reach their goals Both the MTBI and the Enneagram can help you understand yourself and other people. However, you may have a preference. Would you like an in depth description that relies on dichotomies, or would you like a holistic title that basically represents an accepted set of characteristics? Keirsey Temperament Sorter Personality sorting does not end with MTBI and Enneagram Types. American psychologist David Keirsey has formulated the temperament sorter with concepts drawn from Kretschmer. Kretschmer was the one who modeled the four temperaments. Though Kretschmer’s research has also been proven to be valuable to the Myers Briggs categorization, the Keirsey Temperament Sorter is more interested in observable behavior rather than what a person is thinking and feeling. How do you find out your Keirsey Temperament? You will have to take a 70 item test. You will only be given choices between two answers for every question. You will not be asked about what you can do, but rather about what you would prefer. The Four Temperaments 1 Artisan The Artisan is stimulated by tools and anything tangible. They can seamlessly adapt to a dynamic environment. They prefer to see some practical action because they like to make an impact in the world. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Composer (ISFP) e Crafter (ISTP) e Performer (ESFP) e Promoter (EFTP) 2 Guardian The Guardian also gravitates towards the practical and concrete. He, however, seeks security that he can also provide to others. He has an organized set of behaviors, so he does well in logistics. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Inspector (ISTJ) e Protector (ISFJ) e Provider (ESFJ) e Supervisor (ESTJ) 3 Idealist The Idealist is an abstract thinker and tends to have lofty ideas. He is always driven towards finding true identity and meaning in his life. He will continue working towards personal growth but also knows how to be diplomatic and compassionate to others. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Architect (INTP) e Fieldmarshall (ENTJ) e Inventor (ENTP) e Mastermind (INTJ) 4 Rational A Rational person is also an abstract thinker like the Idealist. However, his thoughts are propelled by strategy and mastery. In short, he is very objective and makes use of his competence and skill to do well in his tasks. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Champion (ENFP) e Counselor (INFJ) e Healer (INFP) e Teacher (ENFJ) Takeaway Now that you know how personalities can be categorized and even sub categorized, you can take some tests to see which ones represent you and the people in your social circles. Knowing a person’s personality type or subtype does not mean that you are trying to put him in a box. In this case, you will not use labels to limit people. Instead, you will use them to understand their motivations, fears, and dreams. Chapter 3: The Impact of Culture Vier A aa Experiences, especially during childhood, have an impact on the person and ultimately decide whether they will grow up neurotic or normal. Some theories however lean more towards concluding that nature cannot be changed. A person can still oscillate between neurotic and normal and possibly settle on one side, but he is already a product of his genetics. He is born that way. The effects of experiences are still controlled by the intrinsic qualities that he has. Culture can have a substantial impact on how a personality gets developed. After all, culture commands what is acceptable in the current society. What may be permitted in the United States, for example, may not be admissible in Japan. So, a person who is known for his conformity in the United States may not necessarily be able to adapt just as quickly when in Japan. Here are some points that you should know on the relationship of culture with other factors that affect your personality. Family and genetics affect how culture impacts your personality Whatever culture you are born in, it is ultimately still your family that decides whether you let it influence you. Your parents will be the first ones to introduce you to your culture and what it means to you. They can tell you that it is crucial to conform. On the other hand, they may ask you to go against the norm. You can choose what external factors affect you Even with a strong cultural background, you are a free person. You can decide which external factors you want to be continuously exposed to. You don’t have to accept everything in blind faith. However, your exposure to your culture and religion, as well as your previous experiences, will decide whether you will want to separate yourself from your culture in the first place. Shifting to a completely different cultural system As you grow older, you get to know your culture better. You also may get exposed to other cultures, through media or through travel. Through these experiences, you will discover whether you can relate to your own culture or to another. In your freedom, you can choose to let another culture system become your basis for how you live your life. Takeaway Though you have the freedom to shed what your culture has taught you, it is not that easy to completely discard its effects. The ease in which you do it will depend on your relationship with your country, family, religion, and culture as a whole. Chapter 4: Analyze Personal and Social Aspects Bid S S28 be eee AI OSA Dl SAMME LEPET ET Eee Ble HiSAM 2 Gens CENA DIEE da a CETE VAAN Every little aspect of a person, even the way he breathes or fidgets, will say something about him. It is not enough to say that a person is an ISTJ. It is not enough to say that the person is a Mediator. You have to go closer and add the little details to get a full, clearer picture of who he is. Below are some aspects that you can include in analyzing a person. Health Health can be a powerful factor in how a person behaves. You must not judge a person right away. Look closely. A person who is not feeling well will more likely act grumpy. Of course, some like to hold things in. They will say they are “okay,” but their physical appearance can give you some hints. For example, he may say he is okay, but he looks pale and weak. Appearance Appearance can say so much about a person, more than his just his fashion sense. A person can look disheveled all the time, for example. You may initially think that this person does not know how to take care of himself. However, that may be the case. If his work and the way he dresses outside of the office also look sloppy, then he may be consistently not making an effort. Strengths And Weaknesses You need to have observed the person long enough to find out about his strengths and weaknesses. Someone can tell you his strengths and weaknesses. Then, you can confirm the verity of the information. However, it is still best to make the observations yourself, especially when the person is not aware he is being observed. This is not to say that the person is lying. The person may still be in the process of getting to know himself, as well. Beliefs & Values A belief system — religious or not — can determine a person’s decision and next move. A person’s belief system also decides what he will prioritize. For example, you will catch a glimpse of his priorities by making him draft a list. Through experience, though, you will find out if he does stick to his beliefs or not. Some people are also more unpredictable. Demographics While it is not fair to judge people according to their age, gender, religion, etc. it may provide you with some insights. Each of these demographics descriptions will give you an idea of how the person will act and what he believes. However, do not forget the possible outliers. For example, not all females will lean towards picking frilly, pink things. Similarly, not every married person will be responsible enough to say no to a night out when he has not arranged for a babysitter yet. Of course, these outlying behavior also provides you with more information about the person’s character. The combination of demographics may also enlighten you further. Environment The Person Lives In Sometimes when you say where you live, people react — outwardly or inwardly depending on the person’s character. Places have their own reputations. They also say a lot about the person. For example, an affluent neighborhood can tell you that the person is most likely on the wealthier side of the spectrum. On the other hand, the person may be living in a room there because he feels he will be safer in such a neighborhood. We all have our belief systems and notions about things. There is another way of looking at how a person’s environment affects his character and behavior. SOme people, for example, can be quiet and earnest when they are at work but know how to have fun outside of it. Wealth / Financial Status Wealth may not be a straightforward way of defining character, but it influences a lot of decisions and choices. A wealthy person will more likely make quick decisions when it comes to spending. He has enough extra money to risk. He will tend to buy more expensive brands. Of course, some rich people do know how to save money, but they have wider options. They can choose to go for the brand they prefer. Those who have tighter budgets often do not have a choice but to pick the less expensive — even cheap — purchases. To remain responsible, they have to say no to possible extravagant options. Social Background A person’s social background has a substantial influence on him. The more stable his social connections are, the less likely he will be neurotic. As for social status, it provides a clue as to how a person sees himself and behaves. Cultural Background Two people from different cultural backgrounds will more likely behave differently from each other. If they do behave similarly, then you may have to look at different sets of motivations. Perhaps one is reacting normally, while the other is trying to fit in. The willingness to make adjustments despite their strong cultural background will give you another insight into people. If you are genuinely interested in a person, then you should delve into his cultural background. Perhaps he is friendlier than he seems to appear but is limited by his cultural beliefs. Profession Each person has a role to play. Teachers are expected to be patient and excellent at communicating. Doctors are expected to be caring. In an office setting, the employer will behave differently from the employee. Now, it does not mean to say that all employees will behave the same. However, the role has a significant influence on how you act around certain people. Attitude One of the more transparent ways to understand a person is through his attitude. It is also to look at the person closely when he does not know he is being observed. His reaction and attitude to various people, situations, and events will give you an idea as to who this person really is. Attitude is the result of personality traits. Does he have a positive or negative way of looking at life and treating other people? Circle Of Friends Well, there is a saying about how birds of the same feather flock together. By knowing a person’s friends, you form an idea as to who he is. His friends are people he enjoys spending time with. He must have found some kinship with these people. It does not mean that he will be exactly the same as them, but he finds something that he likes. Why would someone spend a lot of time with people they dislike? Parents Herein, we will look at another saying. People usually say that the fruit does not fall far from the tree. It is true to some extent. Children who are raised by their biological parents have both their nature and nature coming from their father and mother. Some children are closer to one parent, and thus take on that parent’s set of beliefs and behavior. Others are combinations of both parents, creating in themselves a unique mix. Parents are also the ones that usually introduce culture, religion, social standing, and more, to their children. Role Models Growing up, a person begins to turn to role models. Those who have parents who are generally caring and there for them will hail their parents as their first superheroes. As they become more exposed to various forms of media, children recognize other role models. These are people who represent something that they want for themselves. If a person tells you about his role models, then you will discover a lot about that person and his dreams. Interests And Hobbies It is easy to find out what a person’s interests and hobbies are. They are willing to share these in casual conversation. Through a person’s interests and hobbies, you will find out the things that make him happy. By knowing these, you may also get some insight into a person. Goals And Objectives By knowing a person’s goals and objectives, you get a glimpse of what drives him to get up in the mornings. What keeps them going? What is making them feel a certain way? Will they be willing to continue going even when there is a lot of strife? Preference In Food & Beverages Health conscious people will gravitate towards low calorie, highly nutritious food and drinks. They are more likely to be careful with their overall well being. However, you may also notice people who take this so seriously that it has become unhealthy. If you see that a person has been barely eating and is already skin and bones, then something is very wrong. You may need to intervene or ask someone who can. Others will be likely to choose protein rich foods. If this is backed by a muscular physique, then you know that the person has been consciously packing himself with meat for bodybuilding. Takeaway So, one human being takes a lot of details to read. Yes, you will have an easier time understanding someone by identifying his MBTI, Keirsey Temperament, and Enneagram number. However, seeing the person in action in real life will give you a broader look at him beyond tests. After all, sometimes, you find yourself caught up between two types, not quite sure where you are. People are, after all, more complicated than categorized personality types. Chapter 5: Behavior Analysis When you are analyzing someone’s behavior, you must heighten your observation skills. Practice with yourself and those around you first so that you have a tighter grasp of how people behave in several types of situations. You should also be more familiar with facial expressions and their equivalent meanings. You have started making these observations since you were a baby. At a tender age, you must have noticed when your mother was not paying attention as you would want her. You were used to her smiling at you that you started fussing as you saw her poker face. As a child, you knew just when to act a certain way. If you wanted to request something from your parents, you would wait when they were in a great mood. This does not mean that you were walking on eggshells around them, but that you know that sometimes the timing should be perfect. You had been conducting some behavior analysis as a young child, and you did not know it then — not yet. For a more focused and targeted way of analyzing behavior, here are some steps to follow. Establish a baseline When analyzing someone’s behavior, you must have a baseline. You can take this in two ways. One, if you have the opportunity to see the same person several times, then it is easy for you to see what is considered normal behavior for him. Take note of what is normal for this person. Is he naturally loud or quiet? Does he like to mingle or keep to himself? If you have enough observed patterns, then changes will stand out when they happen. Two, you can also interpret the baseline as the behavior of a person compared to the rest of the same group. Is his behavior typical in his type of work? Is he an outlier in his group? You would know this if you have also observed the rest of the team. Observe any deviations from the baseline After establishing the baseline, you should be able to recognize any deviations from it. Is the quiet person suddenly animated and talking a lot? What could have changed? Is the person who usually conforms with what is required in the group suddenly rebelling? What could have happened to make this change? Examine how the person behaves with different groups Since you have started looking at how a person behaves with groups, try to see that person in various groups. Does he change the way he acts from one group or another? Some people, for example, are louder when they are with their close friends and a lot quieter with their office colleagues. However, his overall personality is still consistent with who he is. Read gestures If you can read body language, then you have quite an advantage. It gives you the ability to know what someone is feeling at any given time. The whole pattern of gestures and behavior can create a personality portrait for you. When you are observing gestures, you can start looking at the face. Some typical expressions are easy to read: pouts, frowns, smiles, and grimaces. However, these expressions can be quickly interpreted when you don’t have grey areas to watch out for. Some people may give you a broad smile that does not reach their eyes, for example. So, you must be wary of the baseline, context, and the rest of the person’s body. When it comes to the body, you may look at the posture for clues as to what the person’s mood is. Is he happy or sad? Is he confident, or does he have low self esteem? The flick of the person’s wrist, the movement of his hands, and the general ease of his body around you can tell you a whole story. On the opposite end of this story, you will find a rigid stance and a body that almost refuses to reveal anything. Watch how the person walks Moving on from the gestures, you may look at the way a person walks. The way a person walks can reveal so much about his personality, too. Some like to take quick steps as if they are always in a rush. Others may take things slowly, making time for the details that surround them. It is not just in the speed, either. You may notice that some people take definite steps, while others may shuffle. So, you know which one makes a beeline for his destination, having his plan set out clearly. Others may look as if they are not interested in reaching the end. Zero in on action words When you are talking to someone, you need to focus on the terms that they use. Some words will reveal just what they really mean. For example, people who may use the words “probably,” “maybe,” and vague phrases such as “they say,” may either be not that sure of themselves or are not prepared. You have to compare these words to their baselines. If they always like to use such words, they are not confident. If they only did so during a presentation, then they are not ready. They have not done the work, so they chose to use wishy washy terms. You may want to rely upon people who say “decided,” confirmed,” and other such actionable words. These are people you can rely upon. Of course, you do have to continue comparing these to their baselines. 3) 66 Listen for confidence and command In a group, is there always someone who looks like they are in command? You entered the room for the first time, not really knowing who these people are. Then, your eyes zero in on one of them. The person looks you in the eye, gives you a friendly smile, and his body language is open. He may or may not say, “hello.” I bet you will be surprised if the group suddenly revealed that this person is not the leader. If he turns out to be the leader, then you will likely not be surprised. You felt it. You saw it in the way he handled himself. However, if he turns out to be just another member, and the leader is somewhere in the room, less conspicuous, you may start questioning how the group works. There are a lot of possibilities: e The confident person is not that responsible, but he likes providing personal relations. e The leader is not that confident, but the rest of the team wants to give him a chance. e The group believes that each person must take on the leadership role. e The confident person has the right set of characteristics but does not have the right politics to support him. Whatever the case may be, a confident person will reveal himself pretty quickly in a group setting. This is the person that your eyes will be drawn to. Do all self confident people take on the reins? No, not really. Use what you know about personalities You know what to look for. You have looked at several subtypes of personalities. Now, you need to use what you know about them. e Start with the most apparent characteristics: introvert or extrovert? e What type of introvert or extrovert? e Is the person consistently introverted or extroverted, across various groups? e Does he display a lot of gestures, or are more rigid? e Does he embody a particular type of person: Mediator, Champion, Healer, etc.? e Are they very open with their feelings? While you may be able to pinpoint the MBTI, Enneagram, and Keirsey Temperament of a person, you still have to look into the details. Even when two people have the same MBTI, Enneagram number, and Keirsey Temperament, they cannot be precisely the same. There will still be distinctive differences based on their social and cultural backgrounds and a whole lot of other aspects of their lives. Again, knowing people beyond what they are described as in writing is still the best way of reading and analyzing them. Being able to list and express their personality types is just the beginning. One of the ways you can be more in touch with other people’s personalities is through your own. Be more aware of your facial expressions, gestures, and how you deal with others. Examine what you are actually feeling deep inside whenever you are acting a certain way. Look in the mirror. Check what your smile looks like when you are sad and merely trying to get by. What is the difference between that smile and that grin that you use when you are genuinely pleased? As you become more familiar with yourself and with how other people behave, you can rely on a different set of clues for reading and analyzing people. The 8 point list above shows how you can read and analyze people based on tangible clues. The list below reveals ways in which you can gauge personality through instinct: T; Use intuitive empathy Sometimes, you find yourself talking to a person and really feeling what they are feeling. You can understand their situation and sometimes even take it as your own. When this happens, you may have found someone you comprehend at a higher level, or you may have discovered someone who is a lot like you. Once you realize that a person is a lot like you, you can better analyze his motivations. More likely, they will be similar to yours. 2. Follow your gut feeling It may be challenging to explain, but there are times that you just have a gut feeling about a person. Some may even accuse you of being prejudiced against or for this person for some reason. You confuse yourself at times when you end up welcoming a generally unlikable person or disliking a seemingly pleasant one. Sometimes, past experiences with people create an inner radar. It makes you more sensitive to people who may be presenting themselves in a different light. 3: Rely on insight and Deja Vu Sudden flashes of insight may not be scientific, but they can provide you with warning signs or inspiration. Because you have suddenly thought of something that was not part of your current train of thought, you can change your point of view to examine a different detail about the person you are analyzing. Takeaway Using scientific methods, the powers of observation, and the gift of insight, you can create a personality profile. You do need to mingle with more people so that you can better understand humanity as a whole. Chapter 6: Communication Styles gaa En a a EE gg aad m £] People communicate differently, too. Sometimes when you are not used to someone’s communication style, you may even get offended. You wonder if you have done something wrong when, in fact, the person deals with everyone in the same way. When establishing a person’s baseline, you should be made aware of his communication style. Here are the four primary communication styles. Passive You may end up liking or disliking the passive communicator. On the one hand, he is very inoffensive. He wants to keep the peace and prefers going with the flow. So, he will agree to just about anything. He will quickly move to suit your plan. If you want someone to side with you, befriend a passive communicator. He will be your plus one for almost everything. On the other hand, passive communicators may offend others. Some people may take the noncommittal way of dealing with things as disrespectful. Different people have been striving hard to get to the goal, then the passive communicator does not make much of an effort. He bows his head low. He barely says anything. However, everything seems to flow smoothly enough, as if he was never there. So, complete passivity can still result in misunderstandings. Others who are not used to the passive communicator may resent how he does not really try to change the system. Aggressive The aggressive communicator is the polar opposite of the passive communicator. He likes to take control. He is dominant and may end up the only voice heard during discussions. An aggressive communicator is a person you will not only hear but also feel. He has a way of becoming the focal point, not necessarily because he knows a lot about the topic more than the others. It can be intimidating to talk to such a person. He has a way of intimidating and harassing other people in the group. Passive Aggressive The passive aggressive communicator may not always be loud, but it does not mean that he does not have his own bite. If he does not get his way, he will find a way to let the resentment reverberate through other forms other than oral means. He will let you feel that he does not agree through his sarcasm and body language. The main problem with the passive aggressive communicator is that he is not open. He may disagree, but he may also not openly defend his own stance. He will mutter about, highly suggesting that he is not happy. Assertive The assertive communicator is the most effective in expressing his needs. He is not aggressive and has no plans to offend anyone in the room. However, he gives his argument strength of conviction. The assertive communicator is not like the passive communicator who just goes with the flow. He has his own ideas, and he expresses them. The assertive communicator is not like an aggressive communicator who adds too much fuel to the fire. He can express his ideas calmly, though firmly. The assertive communicator is not like the passive aggressive communicator. If he disagrees, then he will say so. He will not resort to mind games. You will meet all types of communicators in your lifetime. Not all of them will be extreme cases of the kind that they are in. For example, some passive communicators may still express some of their opinions when prompted and given the reassurance that they are valued parts of the group. Similarly, some aggressive communicators may be willing to listen if they know they will be given a chance to say their piece. Finally, some passive aggressive communicators will react better in setups wherein they are working with people that they generally like. Of course, the operative word here is “some.” Situations and combinations of people can also differ. For example, an aggressive communicator can ultimately take advantage of a passive communicator, without anyone else facilitating the meetings or transactions. The best type of communication to aim for, of course, is the assertive one. So, how do you become an assertive communicator? To become an assertive communicator, you need to be able to do the following: e You need to be able to say “no” when you don’t want to do something. e Confidently declare your opinions about the matter. e Be able to hold the gaze of the other person, with less aggression and more openness. e Use active instead of passive sentences. (“I am in charge of the logistics” INSTEAD of The logistics will be done by me.) e Own your ideas. Say that it was you who thought of it if that is the case, rather than pointing at another person. Even if you are not 100% confident that your ideas will be received well, you must be able to stake your claim. Being assertive may be a little more challenging if you are not used to voicing out your opinions. Do not be afraid to do so, though. Remember that whatever you have to say, you are expressing it without hurting anyone. Takeaway This chapter shows us that different people communicate differently. Some of them are just more effective. You will know that by the fact that some people are described as excellent communicators. On the other hand, some people often get misunderstood. Of course, oral communication is just one way of expressing yourself. Add your gestures to the brew, and you have a complete means of interacting with people with the help of your personality. Will you more likely meet people with varied ways of communication? Yes, you will. You will find yourself gravitating towards some people more than others. Perhaps you are more accepting of passive aggressive people because you know where this attitude comes from. How people clique is a whole new mysterious thing. It has to do with the personalities of both the sender and the receiver. Chapter 7: Understanding People’s Motivations — Motivation need to be fully understood. They not only reveal what is going on inside a person. It also shows what makes different people tick. For some people, going to church is a religious experience. They find some light in it. For others, it is a frustrating exercise of faith in something that cannot help them at this point. Everyone has a whole history that explains each set of emotions. In this chapter, not only are we exploring emotions, but we are also exploring needs. What do people need in their life? Why do various people have varied motivations? Maslow’s Hierarchy Of Needs With Maslow’s Hierarchy Of Needs, we see levels of motivations that propel people to do things. This hierarchy is often represented by a pyramid. Self fulfillment needs Esteem needs: prestige and feeling of accomplishment Psychological needs needs: security, safety Basic needs Physiological needs: food, water, warmth, rest Physiological Needs At the base of the pyramid, you can find your physiological needs. These are the most basic of all needs. The items that you can list here are required for our survival. Some people have not risen above the bottom of the pyramid. They are motivated by hunger and instinct. They get up every morning to go to work so that they can fill their stomachs. They work hard so that they can have a place to live in. The house can be bought or rented. What matters is that they have somewhere secure to stay in, especially during the night. Even sexual needs belong to this section. For the human race to survive, there must be sexual intercourse. Some people are still consumed by this instinctual desire. Safety As people understand what they need to survive, they crave more security. They want more than that small house or that one week’s supply of food. Just like their ancestors, they start understanding the importance of gathering more supplies to last them for more extended periods. For the modern man, investing in stocks or saving money in the bank may be their solution. Those who have spared some extra cash may start building bigger houses through extensions. Safety and security do not always mean saving money or accumulating possessions. They can also be linked to your health. Surviving is one thing — but are you healthy? You have food to eat, but are you eating the right types of food? These questions start to matter when you have climbed up a notch in Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Love/Belonging People realize that seeking happiness does not rely on just tangible things. Houses can get old and wrecked. Money gets spent. Even those who have so much will find themselves lonely and alone. They start questioning their existence. Why do we even get back to earn so much? What is it for? Is it for my own survival and existence? Would I be able to share it? This is when people are starting needing more than things that they can own. They realize that a sense of belonging is better. They want to be able to go home to people who care for them and their well being. So, they start recognizing the demand to form more stable relationships, wherein they can achieve intimacy. It can be lonely to just focus on survival. Life should have more meaningful connections with people and not only with objects. You can also think of this part of the hierarchy as your social needs. Your needs to be part of your local church, community, clubs, and organizations all fall under here. This level showcases your desire to find others like you so that you can find people who can understand your goals and motivations. Esteem Needs In the previous level, you want intimacy with other people. However, relationships with others can go deeper than that. You want people to show you some respect. You want others to recognize your efforts and achievements. It cannot all be about spending time together, but that time should also be spent building each other. However, it must be clear that there are two types of esteem. Esteem that encompasses prestige and status — or the way other people perceive a person — is more prevalent among young people. Even adults who have not quite reached a certain degree of maturity may still attempt to achieve prestige. For those who have achieved enough maturity, esteem refers to finding dignity and independence. The person knows that whatever he has mastered is of value to him, whether or not someone else recognizes it. Self Actualization At the very peak of the hierarchy, you will find the desire for self actualization. This is what a person must become, according to his potential. You become what you ought to become. If you have people in your team that have a strong desire for self actualization, value them because they do their work not to please others but to be the best that they can be. Their motivations can help them reach the peak of their potential, and that can serve as an asset to them. Why Is Motivation Important Now that you have seen Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, you can conclude that somehow everyone is motivated by something. The motivations may vary, but people do things for a reason. Understanding why people do things can provide you with insight as to who they are and what they can end up doing. The more data you gather about people and their individual motivations, the more that you understand human nature. Who usually ends limited by their situation that they appear to be stuck at the base of Maslow’s pyramid? Who gets to succeed? Benefits Of Motivation Motivation enables a person to thrive and not just survive. It energizes people when they are going through tasks that are typically challenging. Motivation gives you a reason for doing something. It does not matter that you may start with some of the fundamental reasons out there. The important thing is that you are moving forward with the help of the force exerted by motivation. As you realize how rewarding it is to keep on working towards your goals, you become primed to keep on moving forward. Along the way, you will find other rewards that make completing the tasks more satisfying. Understanding how motivation works will help you motivate other people. Perhaps you are the leader of the team, a primary school teacher, or the CEO of an organization. You must know what will excite your members enough to make them work as hard as they could. Extrinsic Motivation When motivating a group of people, you must decide whether external rewards are helpful or detrimental to the group. Perhaps extrinsic motivation can work by getting people to be interested in the task and its completion. On the other hand, it can make people dependent on these little rewards. A way to provide such a motivation without it becoming materialistic or object based is through the use of praise and positive feedback. Such words can buoy the person’s spirit, helping him want to become a better person. You may even be able to lift him enough so that he can start reaching out towards self actualization. Intrinsic Motivation Sometimes, the motivation is in the task itself. You may have assigned a task that your team enjoys well. Remember how the advice goes? You have to find something that you love to do so that you don’t have to work a day in your life? So, a person who enjoys interacting with children may become a primary school teacher. Of course, there is a lot of hard work that goes with the supposed enjoyment. Still, some teachers persevere amid the low salary and sometimes constant criticism from parents because of their desire to make life better for the children. The task itself is something they find some satisfaction in. However, principals, children, and parents may help by providing some positive feedback, too. This little bit of extrinsic motivation can boost intrinsic motivation. Self Motivation You may observe that some people have a rigid armor of self determination. They get to decide that they have to do something. While assurance may come their way that they are doing more than enough, they may even aspire for perfection. It is innate in them. This type of self motivation is more potent than any other kind of motivation. People who have it in them may be fueled by their need to raise their self esteem or may already be boosted by high self esteem. They are more likely to work towards self actualization. Motivation And Emotion Motivation is closely linked to emotions. It is something that urges you to do something. In fact, the words “motivation” and “emotion” both come from the Latin root movere . What does that sound like? If you said “to move,” then you are right. Both motivation and emotion cause you to move or to do something. It propels you into action, in what seems to be almost like a psychic push. Feeling It starts with feelings. You must feel something about the task at hand. If you hate the job, then you may not be as motivated to do it. If you are thrilled about the prospect of doing the task, then motivation can quickly follow. Your opinion about something makes you more likely to feel something about it. You are either eager to perform the job or unwilling to do anything about it. Feelings refer to your cognitive interpretation of the situation, based on your past subjective experiences. At this point, you are aware of what the task presents to you. Arousal With feelings, everything stops at the mental level. You are aware of the task or goal and what it can do for you. You need some elevation for you to reach arousal. Arousal refers to the physiological reaction of your body. Instead of just wanting to do something at an intellectual level, your body is geared towards doing the task. You can feel your muscles tightening to run that race, for example. Even at the invisible point, your hormones are racing to help you activate the rest of your body. The brain has already passed on the message to the rest of you. Purpose When you are physiologically ready, there is nothing that can stop your body. You are capable. However, you need something to drive you to further do what you need to do. You must have a purpose. The ability to function should buoy you to do whatever you are set out to do. The goal that you have must be expressed into action. Expression Your facial expressions and your tone of voice all show that you are motivated. Other people should read what you have in your mind because they can see your focus and intent. These four markers of emotion can also serve as the four indicators of motivation. Motivation is not just a construct, heavily reliant on its theoretical form, but it is also tangible. It can be felt through your real physiological reactions and revealed through your facial expressions. Motivation And Personality Since this book is all about personality, talk about motivation makes you think: Do people belonging to some personality types have better motivation than others? Has it all been written in the stars, so to speak? According to personality theories, different people gain their motivations in different ways. For example, some people are more likely to be more conscientious, and others lean more towards neuroses. Experiences also play a role in the development of motivation. Some people have been exposed to more challenges that had honed them to become steadier and more reliable. Others would still end up reacting differently, taking challenges as upfronts. The cybernetic big five theory has associated some personality traits with a variety of goals. For example, extroverts will be more open to extrinsic motivation, such as rewards. They are more likely physiologically stimulated by the idea that there is a gift after a challenging task. With the channeling hypothesis in mind, some points have been hypothesized to be true: Highly neurotic people will more likely give up if exposed to negative feedback. They may easily give up on a goal just because they could not get the reaction they expected. Conscientious individuals will continue striving for their self betterment and eventual self actualization. Extroverts will pursue careers that will provide them with a lot of satisfaction, especially in the sense of holding some kind of power. Agreeable people are more likely to better team workers. They are not opposed to pursuing a goal that benefits not only them but also others in the same group. Meanwhile, the selection hypothesis also has some observations, according to their studies: Introverts who are less agreeable and less conscientious will more likely spend more time wondering. This can prevent them from achieving their goals. People who are more open to practice less prejudice seek out friendships beyond their race. Individuals who achieve happiness more easily are usually more extroverted and more agreeable. When it comes to planning, here are some of the coping styles that were observed: e Conscientious individuals do not experience as much stress as they usually plan in advance. e Agreeable people do not have problems with teamwork or planning as a group. e People with high neurotic tendencies will more likely have issues with managing and directly engaging with the sources of their stress. So, they sometimes zone us as if there is nothing to worry about. e On the opposite end, extroverted people fully engage with their stressors. e Some people who thrive on stimuli would get involved with risky actions and choices. Those who do not need to stay as stimulated will keep away from trouble. To conclude, yes, you can directly link personality to motivation. However, you should also not generalize. Among extroverts, for example, some are still more likely to be conscientious and rule abiding, while others will lean towards risk taking. Motivation For Change Motivation is almost always geared toward change. People are motivated to do or complete a task when the right type of change is promised. For example, people get up early so that they can get more work done or to reach the office on time. They are probably tired of being tardy. Perhaps by changing a bad habit, they want to show that they are ready for improvement. Going to the gym can be a challenging commitment—however, the promise of improving one’s body and health will overcome that challenge. For motivation to become part of the issue, the activity is not intrinsically motivating. Pulling ourselves away from enjoyable but unrewarding activities can be next to impossible. With motivation, nevertheless, you can make that change. How does motivation help make change happen? e The person must be willing to change. e He must believe that change can happen. e He must make the change happen through a set of challenging but rewarding actions. e Happiness Motivation Happiness can be considered a feeling, as well. Having it linked to whatever it is that you are aiming for just might give you the motivation that you need. It is easier to do something that promises happiness. People want to strive toward things that promise to aid their emotional and psychological well being. But is happiness a good motivator? According to Barbara Fredrickson’s research, positive emotions expand how we see things. So, they let us see up to the goal that we are aiming for. We are seeing our goals with brighter, clearer eyes. Moreover, we should also consider Teresa Amabile’s studies on how happy employees are more productive. So, if you are a manager, you may want to find ways to teach a joyful atmosphere at your office. You must know how to encourage every employee when they feel down. Look at him beyond just being a productive member. You should see the person behind the ID number because each employee wants to be recognized and appreciated. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) recognize how even the shortest period of positivity has a high effect on income, health, work, and other aspects of a person’s life. However, it should be clear, according to Martin Seligman, that true happiness can only be gained through self development. After all, when you move towards improving yourself, you look at motivation in a better light. As a result, you continue becoming even more motivated. This is what proactive psychology is all about. You continue asking yourself about what you could become. Rules To Understand People Rule One: It is usually conceit, not malice, that makes you feel hurt. Before you take what someone else does seriously, think about how and why you reacted. Why did you feel hurt? Is the interaction more about how you think or what the other person intends to happen? Of course, you also have to consider the fact that some people do mean malice. This is where your human analysis comes in. Did that person really want to hurt you? Rule Two: Most social behaviors are vague or not explicit. Unfortunately, you need to know people better to understand their actions. Most actions are not explicit. There will be no narration as you perform your daily tasks and other people do theirs alongside you. Sometimes, you may subscribe to what society expects and suggests the meanings are. So, you end up thinking, for example, that people pleasing, friendly people are suspicious. You question their smiles and approach as if you are in a mystery film. What you should realize is that while it may be right not to trust every smile, some people still have a real kind of light. People are more complicated than some are trying to make them look. Rule Three: Selfish altruism drives emotionless transactions. When you purchase something or whenever money is involved in a transaction, you can call it selfish altruism. You aren’t really being generous to the salesperson where you are getting your product from. You want the product for yourself, and you are willing to pay for it. You pay for the product, thus giving the company some needed revenue and the salesperson his commission. Rule Four: Most people have poor memories. There may be times when you may feel offended that someone behaves like he does not know you. Unless you are very close to the person, you should not feel terrible about this. A person who does not know you well or only met you a few times may have honestly forgotten who you are. Perhaps they know your face but not your name and do not know how quite to approach you. You may have experienced the same thing on your end at some point. Another thing that you have to be on the lookout for are those with poor eyesight. People with terrible vision may not greet you because they have not seen you. This is a common enough scenario. Rule Five: People are emotional beings. If a person does not interact with you in the way that you expect him to, it may be due to his mood or emotions that day. The scenario may have played out because of what the other person is feeling — or perhaps because of what you are feeling. Sometimes, it is hard to tell. It can be the clashing of emotions from both of you. Rule Six: People are lonely. Sometimes, we just cannot understand how lonely people can be. So, they may try to connect with you for various reasons. Some will genuinely want to become your friend while others just need any type of company. You must be able to discern who is who. In that loneliness, however, you can probably find something in common that can create a more profound and genuine bond. Rule Seven: People are self absorbed. This rule is especially true in the 21* century. Everyone has his own issues. So, you may find that people are more interested in talking about themselves, rather than connecting with you. This is not your fault. You may find yourself doing the same thing at times. Takeaway This chapter shows you that different people communicate differently. One thing does not always mean the same thing. Someone may ignore you but actually is just having a hard time that day. We are all humans. The way that we communicate is affected by how we, as humans, feel and get affected by our environment. Chapter 8: Reading People Through Body Language And Non Verbal If you can on the non verbal communication that pale inadvertently send, you may have a more accurate way of analyzing them. People often do not say what they mean. They are generally tricky to read, even in social situations. The same gesture can mean different things if done by various people. Body language cannot lie — at least not entirely. Even those who are well versed in their meanings cannot fake every little gesture. For example, someone may attempt to give you a smile that reflects in his eyes. However, he may not be able to stop a micro expression from happening. If you observe him closely, you may still be able to catch a quick frown or grimace. The Science Of Body Language Body language refers to the non verbal cues that we pass on to other people. It can be more difficult to lie with gestures. Luckily, we are given enough opportunity to see who people really are and what they really mean. After all, about 60% of communication is non verbal. A person can be saying one thing, but his body may be saying something else. You should then draw upon your past knowledge and experiences about facial expressions, for example. Even facial expressions have more minute parts that you have to investigate closely. Reading People Through Non Verbal Of The Hands And Palms How people move their hands and palms reveal some clues as to what they are feeling. The hands can show you whether a person should be trusted or not, for example. Hands that are hidden in pockets or hands placed on the head can mean the person is hiding something. However, they can also mean something else. However, depending on the context, they can mean something else. They can mean nervousness or just the appreciation of having pockets. Some women do enjoy skirts with pockets. Hands placed on the head may suggest frustration. You must check the facial expression, too. When you are speaking to a crowd or teaching, you should check where your audience’s elbows are. If someone has one elbow on his desk, supporting his head, he is intently listening. However, if two elbows are supporting the head, it may suggest that your audience is bored and must be engaged differently. Please be wary of people who find it necessary to put an object between you and them when you are supposed to be conversing. The object serves as a blocking device. They may or may not be consciously aware that they do not want to talk to you for some reason. Reading People Through Their Hand Movement Hand movement, not just their location, can also provide you clues as to what a person is thinking or feeling. Some are pretty clear and may have been intentionally given. Surely, people who give a thumbs up or thumbs down sign have chosen to do so. It can mean that they conform to the group — but it will more likely mean expressing their approval or disapproval. A clenched fist can also mean a few different things. For one, it can show anger, especially if it is at the end of a straight, rigid arm. It may also be shaking in front of another person’s face. Listen and observe clues, as well. The raising of clench fists may show a sign of solidarity. This can be mainly noted when people are also shouting what it is that they stand for. With your “okay” gesture, wherein your thumb and index finger form a circle, while the other three fingers are extended or raised, you must be careful. The same signal may not mean anything good in some European and South American countries. In fact, some Europeans see it as calling a person a nobody, while some South Americans even use it as a vulgar gesture. The same goes for the V sign. Some of you may think that it is a sign of victory for everyone, but if you turn it with your palm facing you, it means something offensive — especially if you are English or Australian. Reading People Through Their Hand Writing A person’s handwriting can also say so much. Some may not guess this right away because children are usually trained to write their letters similarly. Letters have to be written a certain way, meeting the proper lines and forming the right curves. Even though we all started getting trained with traditional penmanship, our styles show divergence from the core. For example, some people generally write large letters while others keep the symbols tight to each other. What do these preferences and styles mean? Sloppy handwriting may seem like a display of disinterest and lack of discipline. It may be the case with most, but some studies show that it may indicate high intelligence and creativity. People who are brimming with ideas seem not too fond of being dragged down by the careful forming of letters. With younger children in the classroom, however, this may indicate disciplinary issues or slow learning. Children will struggle with forming their letters if they are just getting familiarized with them. Penmanship Size Apparently, penmanship size can show whether you are introverted or extroverted. People persons tend to have large — loud! — handwriting that seems to call attention. Introverts, on the other hand, tend to write with smaller letters. Slant Even the slant of your penmanship can reveal so much about you. Some people write with no slant at all, thus showing themselves to be stable and logical. These are people who do not get ruled by their emotions. People who slant their letters to the right are more family oriented. They tend to be more emotional. Their decisions are ruled by their hearts. On the other hand, we see people who slant their letters to the left. These are people who choose themselves over others if push comes to shove. They are reserved and would rather deal with inanimate objects rather than with people. Interestingly, despite traditional writing practices, children start showing their preferred slant at a very young age. Pressure Have you seen penmanship that presses so hard on paper that they create little indentations you can feel at the back? These are people who use a lot of pressure on their pens. They usually put a lot of emotions into what they are doing. They are passionate and will follow a point from beginning to the very end. On the other hand, we have people who write lightly. The strokes feel ethereal but no less present. These are people who do not stress themselves emotionally. They can quickly leave a situation without harboring a lot of baggage afterward. Loops People who write with loops on top of letters such as “t,” “1,” and the like have big dreams. However, they also tend to be more paranoid, perhaps because they take their goals seriously. Those whose letters are retraced may have experienced having failed at their goals. However, they do have the discipline to dust themselves up. Lower Loops/Zone The loops in your letter’s lower zone (as in with “y,” “z” and the like) can say a lot more about you. Larger lower loops show a large circle of friends, while those with slimmer loops have a select group. Longer loops mean a desire to be overreaching and to travel to various places. On the other hand, those with shorter loops prefer to stay at home. cc Dotted Is The dot in your small letter “I” also shows your personality. If you like using circles instead of dots, you are playful and creative. On the other hand, a neat dot means you don’t want unnecessary details, which you likely notice very well. Spacing People who have little spacing may have poor time management, while those that use even spacing are fully aware of boundaries. Of course, you must also consider other details. For example, you can check out whether the person has any space on the sheet of paper. Perhaps he is just trying to fit the text in because there is not a lot of writing space left. Reading People Through Their Posture And Orientation Someone’s stance and posture can tell you whether a person is confident or not. The way a person straightens his back and holds your gaze should give you a clue. Posture can affect a person’s overall look because it involves the spine. It can tell you how someone is feeling, emotionally, or physically. For example, someone who is hunched may either be feeling sick or feeling unconfident. On the other hand, someone who is seated up straight is alert and attentive. At assemblies or meetings, you may want to check out who has an open or a closed posture. When you fold your arms, you are closing yourself off from what the person is saying. A person interested in what you are saying will not put anything in front of himself, including his arms, to block your message. Reading People Through Facial Language And Eyes For as long as you can remember, you know how to read basic facial expressions. You generally know when someone is happy. They have a smile, a glint in their eyes, and a spring in their step. But wait, what if you have to rely on the face alone? Well, the face will provide you clues on what happiness generally looks like. However, a fake smile will not reach the eyes. Even babies can recognize how menacing a broad smile can be when matched with blank or angry eyes. Most people, however, trust the small smile combined with slightly lifted eyebrows. Researchers have labeled this particular expression as the most trustworthy one. A frown is also pretty commonplace and usually indicates sadness or dissatisfaction. A pout may say the same thing. However, it can also be playful. You can examine the context. Facial expressions are very crucial because we often use them to judge other people. Sometimes, we may not even notice it, but each of these expressions subconsciously affects us. Facial expressions, however, can be faked. Someone can give you a wide smile with squinted eyes to don’t have to look into them further. So, you need to focus on the micro expressions. Microexpressions are subtle and fleeting. You must attentively observe a person to get a look at them. Dr. Paul Ekman popularized the term “micro expression.” This refers to expressions that only stay for a short period — a fraction of a second. Sometimes, a quick glance at somebody will help you catch that person’s micro expression. So, you will see what the person genuinely feels. For example, a person who you think is your friend has been chatting with you. The conversation suddenly turns to politics. You become more forceful with your opinions. The other person tries to keep the discussion friendly, giving you reassuring smiles that seem to say he understands where you are coming from. Then, you tum around. Realizing that you have forgotten to say something, you do an abrupt turn. During that turn, you see his facial expression change very quickly. You catch his expression hardens. He immediately goes back to smiling when he realizes that you are watching. That split second facial expression reveals more than in the minutes or even hours of conversation you have had with this person. He has not been prepared to put his social mask back on. Here are some micro expressions that you must be on the lookout for. Surprise: e Definitely raised brows, with the skin below them stretched e Eyeball whites are more pronounced e Forehead wrinkles are showing e Jaw drops e Teeth parts e No tension around the mouth (as would happen in faked surprise) 4. Fear: e Forehead wrinkles between eyebrows show up e Raised and knitted eyebrows e Tense lower eyelid raised upper eyelid e Open mouth e Tensed and stretched lips e Upper white part of the eyeballs is showing 5. Happiness e Raised cheeks e Showing of crow’s feet on the outside of eyes e Wrinkle forms from the side of the nose to the outer lips e Lip corners are drawn to the sides and up 6. Sadness e Pouting lower lip e Lip corners are drawn down e Inner corners of eyebrows are knitted, going up e Lifting of the jaw 7. Anger e Tense lower lip e Bulging or staring eyes e Vertical lines are apparent between eyebrows e Knitted and lowered eyebrows e Lips pressed together, corners going down e Jutting lower jaw e Flaring of nostrils 8. Disgust e Narrowed eyes e Raised upper lip e Exposed upper teeth e Wrinkled nose e Raised cheeks 9. Contempt e One side of the mouth is raised With the help of micro expressions, you can better understand what a person is feeling. If you want a better window to anyone’s should, then that would be someone’s eyes. The eyes may try — but they will have a more challenging time lying. The eyes can reveal so much because some parts move automatically. For example, you cannot control how your pupils dilate. In conversation, you may want to check out if the person makes or refuses eye contact. Eye contact showcases openness and trustworthiness. On the other hand, too much of it can be a threat. Meanwhile, avoiding eye contact can be a sign that the person has something to hide. Of course, it is also possible that you are dealing with a shy person. As for blinking, too much or too little can be a sign of a type of deception. Everyone blinks several times in a day. However, if a person is blinking too much, he may be uncomfortable. The discomfort can be a result of the conversation, but it can also be something physical — like something getting into the person’s eyes. On the other hand, a person who rarely blinks may be hiding something. He may try way too much to control his facial expressions and eye movements. The result is a lot more suspicious than if he has not tried anything at all. Looking deeper in, you will recognize an interested person, perhaps even sexually. The pupils usually dilate when a person feels attraction, interest, or thrill. Reading People Through Their Breathing Even the way someone breathes may let you in as to what he is feeling. Make sure, however, that you are aware of whatever health issues the person has. Perhaps he is an asthmatic. So, when his breathing becomes shallow and labored, you may be needed for assistance. Other people display labored breathing when they are furious. Yet others breathe fast when they are aroused, though this one sounds more like in the perverted territory. Heavy breathing may also suggest the person is out of shape, especially if it happens after a brief walk instead of strenuous exercise. Of course, some calm people can breathe evenly even when they are on the alert. The breathing is barely discernible. These people are barely ruffled. They are either truly calm or masters of the poker face. Reading People Through Their Haptics Haptics refers to the use of touch. This study is important because it exposes people to various textures, as well as to nonverbal cues. Touch can signify so much. Some people are a lot more touchy feely. However, most may have realized that they need to be careful about touch, as well. Touch can also be misunderstood. After all, it can be done between two completely different people. The touchy person may find it natural to reach out, but the other person may be offended. So, before touch can even be established in a relationship, you should make sure that the type of relationship has been established. Depending on the connection, various types of touch can be permitted — or not. Some touches are blatantly sexual and may only be acceptable in some situations. Not all up close touch is sexual, either. A hug can be purely platonic, exchanged among relatives and friends. Touch is not always pleasant. A touch can deliver a painful interaction: push, pull, pinch, kick, strangle, and other means of fighting. So, yes, touch can mean physical or even sexual abuse. So, it is important to be able to interpret a touch correctly so that the alarm can be sounded on time. Of course, the primary responsibility is on the person who is doing the touching, but you must know when to make arun for it, as well. The word “touch” can also be used for feeling yourself — through masturbation. This is how touch can have so many insinuations. The fact that touch is so important should not be much of a surprise because the fetus develops touch as its very first sense. When they are born, the sense of touch and warmth helps them to thrive. This is why some premature babies are given the chance to be cuddled by their parents or any other primary caregiver. Interestingly, “touch” can mean a lot more than physical contact. It can also refer to emotional effects. On the whole, you can use the sense of touch to convey or interpret emotions. You can analyze what the person is trying to say with touch. Conversely, you can trigger emotions through touch. The emotions that may arise will have been affected by the person’s past experiences. Reading People Through Their Proxemics Proxemics basically combines all that we know about body language so far. We try to interpret a person’s feelings based on their: e Movements e Positions e Gestures e Proximity to you Knowing how to read body language will help you better understand other people. At the same time, you can present the best view of yourself. Chapter 9: The Art of Thin Slicing If you have read Malcolm Gladwell’s book, “Blink,” you may have encountered the term “thin slicing.” You have probably already correctly guessed that it has something to do about reading people. You have discovered scientific ways of reading and analyzing people in the previous chapters. Moreover, you have learned that less than scientific approaches are also available and possible. This is the case with thin slicing. What Is Thin Slicing? First, we need to understand what this term means. The phrase sounds very fresh, but it has been around since 1992. It was coined by Robert Rosenthal and Nalini Ambady. People first read about “thin slicing” in a Psychological Bulleting paper. Basically, thin slicing means being able to identify patterns from thin slices of experiences. Because the patterns have risen from small snippets of knowledge, people subconsciously based their reactions on them. For example, a teacher may subconsciously react differently towards two different children. She may, for example, be more likely to say “No” to one child requesting a bathroom break compared to another child. She may not be aware that she had been gathering past encounters with both children to decide. Thin slicing does not rely on long periods with the people you are analyzing. That won’t be thin slicing, anymore. That would be dealing with people that you have known and observed. You can almost guarantee what their next step would be. According to marital expert John Gottman, for example, he can gather enough information about a couple within an hour. He uses those thin slices of experience to predict with 95% accuracy whether the couple will stay together or not. Interestingly, he says that his accuracy significantly decreases when he has had more time with the couple. Perhaps the first few minutes activates his gut feeling. He grabs the first thoughts and makes use of those to create a conclusion. When he has had more time, he probably starts to second guess himself. It is also possible that the couple put on their social masks when they realized that they are being watched. Another compelling Malcolm Gladwell example concerns an art sculpture brought to the J. Paul Getty Museum. Art experts felt there was something wrong with it. Despite this initial gut feeling, the figure proved to be genuine upon close inspection. Later on, however, the experts were proven right. Apparently, the unscientific non method of thin slicing can work better than some methodical investigations. How Thin Slicing Translate Into Day To Day Life Thin slicing may not always be described as such. Some people may refer to basing their decisions on a “gut feeling.” Even top notch businessmen may have moments wherein they rely on this unscientific type of feeling. In fact, they can be some of the best at applying the technique in real life. There is no magic involved. The method entails that you have seen the Same pattern several times. You recognize the pattern enough to analyze what should be expected. Through thin slicing, you can get rid of your biases and focus on what you are experiencing. This way, you can focus on what the client brings to the fore. Your mind’s side comments must be ignored. Reading signatures can also be part of thin slicing. You take a look at the person’s signature and make a judgment on what kind of person he is. What’s In Thin Slicing In thin slicing, you can expect: e Quick decisions e First impressions e Awareness of micro expressions and interactions e Non verbal communication e Subconscious judging e Pattern recognition So How Do I Do Thin Slicing? e Thin slicing depends on smaller details. You can perform it by looking at one element and then focusing on your first impressions on that. e Do not take too long to make a judgment. e Do not overthink it. Some people may still present a false persona in that thin slice of time that you get to observe them. However, experience with more types of people will help you build an accurate understanding of reading people within the first hour. Chapter 10: | W Insecurity makes different people behave in different ways. It is not just about being too meek and mild. Some actually showcase aggression to make up for their insecurity. Knowing whether a person is insecure helps you understand what you should do to help the other person or to alleviate the situation between the two of you. Of course, you must also consider what persona you are showing to the world. Are you also revealing instances of insecurity? Here are some indicators of insecurity:. Bullying A bully does not feel right in himself. So, he finds other people’s self esteem in squash. He may look dominant and intimidating, but a bully is really nothing more than an insecure person trying to be more secure about himself. Defensiveness An insecure person is defensive because he cannot handle criticism. Instead of listening to what can potentially help him improve, he immediately takes it as an insult and presents reasons. Selfishness Selfishness entails a person keeping things for himself as much as he can. The insecure person does not share objects that he feels he needs he will need for himself because he is not that secure in his situation. He must have all the praise, materials, and attention. Joking too much This has been said before — in a different way. Sad, insecure people may attempt to be the life of the party in powerful ways. There must always be something filling in the gaps, keeping things interesting along the way. He cannot trust being accepted by others if he does not have anything “fun” to offer. Self promotion Let us face it. Sometimes, you need to promote yourself to be recognized, especially if your field is saturated with similarly skilled people. However, there is a difference between that and talking about yourself constantly. A person who must always be validated is insecure. He is clamoring for responses, affirmations, and even praise. Cannot Endure Silence When an insecure person is left alone, his thoughts become louder. He just cannot endure the silence. So, he must chat up a storm with someone. When the other person stops talking, he starts wondering if he has somehow caused offense. To assure himself rather than to honestly communicate, he must speak. Extreme Competitiveness Being competitive is good for survival. It is also suitable for being recognized. Everyone wants to win at something. That is natural. However, competing all the time can be tiring. This is needed by an insecure person to assert his skills and to consistently prove a few things to himself. Materialistic Insecure people associate their value with material goods. They feel like they can replace a sense of accomplishment with a cashmere sweater, a Porsche, or a mansion. Their belongings should be branded, with logos that can be seen a mile away. If they don’t get to do this, it feels like something is missing. They always have something to prove to other people. The logo emblazoned clothes serve to show what they can afford. Boastful or Arrogant The insecure person is more likely to drop a social media “humblebrag.” This means that he pretends humility while actually displaying something he is very proud of — the very object of the post. An example of a possible humblebrag would be a beautiful woman posting an attractive photo of herself in a bikini. Then, she may caption it as feeling sorry for herself for gaining some weight. Of course, you must be on the lookout for the tone. Some will come out as genuinely funny jokes, more hilarious than annoying. Most humblebrags will, however, make people shake their heads. Too Authoritative When you meet an authoritative person, you know that person is in command. But what if the other person is too full of it? He may be too bossy and give harsh punishments. Moreover, he may like barking out orders as if he is a demi god. Then, you may be right in suspecting that the person is insecure. It may not seem that way. After all, this is a person who has a good position. What does he have to be insecure about? Being too bossy, however, is a sign that this person is compensating for something that he subconsciously feels he is lacking. On One End of Abuse The abuser and the abused may both display some degree of insecurity. The abuser may have gone through abuse at some point. He may be an extreme version of the authoritative person. An insecure person may display abusive characteristics in a relationship. He may seek to control his partner, paving the way for the other person to become a completely different one. Men, more than women, are more likely to be guilty of this. An insecure person, on the other hand, may allow herself to be abused. She feels as if she does not deserve anything else other than that poor treatment. This is why so many people end up not leaving abusive relationships. They do not think they have any value beyond that relationship. Women are more likely to submit to such a display of insecurity, but it can also happen to men. Too Sexual People who display blatant sexuality feel as if there is nothing else about them beyond their beauty and wiles. Sexuality can become both a commodity and a weapon, though the former is more common for insecure people. Other Signs of Insecurity The above are some of the most apparent signs a person is insecure. Others will not manifest right away. As you get to know the person, you may also observe the following about unconfident people. They do not like meeting other people. Insecure people want to deal with people that they are used to. Meeting new ones will just take them out of their comfort zone. They would have to make adjustments to suit whatever new type of conversations are coming their way. They do not believe they are good enough Sadly, insecure people do not think they are good enough. Sometimes, they will tell you this directly. Most of the time, though, you can infer it through the way they avoid big tasks and attention. When they do get assigned something important, they may express their surprise and overflowing gratitude for being trusted. They can lie to themselves You may feel something off about an insecure person. Why? They will try to pass themselves out for somebody else. They will try to act the way they feel they are expected to behave. Moreover, they may also not believe that anything good could happen to them. So, they will first deny any signs of good news that come their way. “That is impossible. I cannot be true.” “That will not likely happen to me.” They do not trust other people What can you expect from someone who does not even believe himself? He will also likely not have faith in others. He is continuously suspicious, and he may even feel paranoid about what other people are really thinking about him. It is not a very pleasant way to live. They are anxious and they complain too much Because they do not know how to trust, they are always anxious about something. Instead of actively improving their lives, they may complain about what they do have. They cannot appreciate even the best aspects of what they have. Because of this, they may not see the blessings that they are, in fact, receiving. They miss out on a lot. Takeaway Too much anxiety and low self esteem can really take away the fun in life. So, an insecure person will miss out on a lot. He may not grab an opportunity because he does not believe he is skilled enough. He may even think that the person assigning him feels sorry for him or does not really mean to appoint him the task. An insecure person will also not enjoy happy relationships. He may be abusive or become abused. The above should help you recognize insecure people. Take note, though, that they also vary from each other. Some unsure people can inspire protection. You want to help them feel better about themselves. Others can be so arrogant and combatant that you may almost hope that they will really fall on their own faces. Remember, though, that you do not know the full story of each individual. You are not given the details of their grief and suffering. Chapter 11: How to Spot a Romantic Interest L More likely, you have heard the term “mixed signals” when referring to romantic gestures. The person doing the observation may be reading it wrong, or the person being observed is knowingly or unknowingly sending the wrong idea. Getting or sending the wrong signal can cause a world of hurt and humiliation. To avoid issues regarding mixed signals, you may want to take a closer look at body language. There may be a rare occasion when the other person may just directly tell you they are interested. However, you may want to protect yourself by knowing the clues as to whether they are being sincere. How Women Signal Romantic Interest Women have their own way of signaling romantic interest. When they see a man (or woman) they are interested in, they may start primping. You will find them fixing their hair in a rather elegant way, almost like in a shampoo commercial. They will straighten their posture and push their chest slightly forward. The eye also has something to do with it, even with the shyer ones. If a woman likes you, she will try to catch your gaze. When you do look her way, she will look away. If this stops here, it can cause confusion. However, someone who is genuinely interested will give you another look. On the other hand, a woman who clarifies she is not interested will show you some of her bad habits, such as scratching herself or picking on her teeth. While these are possibly everyday actions, a romantically interested woman will not show you what she considers private and unsightly grooming habits. How Men Signal Romantic Interest Men apparently have many ways of showing if they are interested in women or other men. They may be playful and raise an eyebrow, or more serious, parting his lips when watching you. Everything about his face opens up to you: noise flared, eyes wide open, and raised brows, as if he is amazed by what he sees. If there are other people in the room, he will try ways to catch your attention. He may be louder than the rest of the people in the group. Perhaps he finds it the right time to talk philosophically, or in ways that he may think may impress you. When in a group, he will distance himself so that you will see him as an individual. He may also display some actions that imply sexual activity, or at least the anticipation of some form of it. No, he may not be aware of what he is doing. However, you will see that he may give you a crotch display — not in a lewd manner, but the way he sits will have him spreading his legs open. His posture is straight, but his body seems to be directed at you. This is what some people call sexually charged, the moment you realize that he is so interested that he even makes a show of squeezing a can of soda. As for somewhat cuter gestures that show he is interested, he may comb back or muss up his hair while watching you. He may also stroke his face a lot more. In an event, he may even become just a tad possessive, guiding you by your elbow or the small of your back. The nonverbal message is not only directed at you but also to other men in the room who may attempt to take over. Other Signs Someone Is Flirting With You When you finally meet or get introduced to the person, you may start interacting as friends, colleagues, or mere acquaintances. You may need to take notice of how they interact with other people. Some are incorrigible flirts. So, it is a habit for them. They do not really settle on one just person, but they are friendly enough to get away with it. Some people, on the other hand, might be too shy to make any kind of move. Keep your eyes peeled. They let you catch them checking you out. For some of them, they cannot keep it a secret anymore. They probably want to get to the next phase of confessing and committing to a romantic relationship — or even an entanglement. So, they do not even look away anymore when you feel their gaze on you. They let you see that they have been looking at you 10. They can be touchy feely. Now, this can be complicated. Some people are touchy feely. Notice your most extroverted colleague. They may like to touch an arm here, pat a hand there, and so on. Of course, you should also be wary about touches that cross the line. Unwanted contact cannot be accepted even if you think the other person is trying to relay a romantic interest. You must also show a clear interest in the person for such a touch to be okay. You should not feel uncomfortable and violated afterward. 11. They open up their body and face to you. If a person is interested in you, their face and body are open to you. This is the facial expression discussed earlier: eyes wide open, brows raised, mouth parted, and nose flared. Their arms are also open. On the other hand, folded arms suggest that the person is not very thrilled about what you say. They do not want to be there. 12. They direct their body to you Look at the feet of the person. If they are interested in you, then you will see that their feet are pointed towards you. They are fully engaged in the conversation, instead of their body merely directing itself towards the exit as if to escape. 13. They put their belongings near you (especially in the case of women). If a woman is interested in you, she will likely put her purse near you. A man or a woman may place their drinks near you, as well. This signifies some level of trust. They are trusting you to be near their essential possessions. There is some degree of intimacy in placing your drink near somebody else. It seems to suggest trust that you will not put anything in there, a glass that contains a liquid that you have to imbibe. 14. They keep your gaze. Someone who is romantically interested in you may keep your gaze. That person is probably contemplating whether to disclose their feelings for you. They have exposed themselves by giving you a look at the windows to their soul. 15. They give you quick glances. Others are probably shyer about expressing their feelings. So, they do so in little doses, through quick glances. They want to look at you again. Part of them does not want you to see, but part of them wants to get caught. Takeaway There are many ways a person can flirt. However, his personality may ultimately affect the strategy that he will choose. Sometimes, it is not even a matter of strategy. Genuine people who want to get to know someone else romantically may present their real selves quickly enough because they care about their feelings reciprocated without a lie involved. Chapter 12: Types Of Liars And How To Deal ith Them N we “ A w ad oe f Unfortunately, some people will lie to you. They vary when it comes to intent and malice. It is sometimes crucial for your survival and relationships to know who is lying to you or not. What Is Lying? Lying is not telling the truth or giving a false statement. However, for the second part of the definition to be an accurate one, the person declaring the information should know that he is not telling the truth. Lying occurs because the person more likely wants to protect himself from the consequences of the truth. It may also be used to present the person in a more impressive light. So, lying can help a person get away with something he could be punished or denigrated for. It can also paint a more beautiful picture of the person. Definition Of A Lie A lie is a false statement. It may also be a twisted version of the truth. Compulsive Liars Compulsive liars, as the name suggests, lie all the time. However, there are two types of compulsive liars. The first type is the narcissistic liar. He lies all the time to keep his grandiose backstory going. In his stories, he is always the hero. The second type is the habitual liar. His lies may not be as farfetched as those coming from the narcissist. However, they also do not find anything wrong with lying all the time. Both types can be very evident with their lying. They avoid eye contact, for example, and may even sweat it out. However, they make it a point to continue their stories, no matter how clearly invented they are. Pathological Liars Pathological liars lie all the time, as well. However, compared to the compulsive liars, they are more challenging to catch. They may have told the story several times that they no longer know which parts are real and which parts are fabricated. They lie not to escape punishment and not to make themselves out to be the hero of the story. Instead, they lie to defend themselves. It is highly likely that they may have encountered trauma in their past that has made them ready to protect themselves. Sociopathic Liars Sociopathic liars lie maliciously. They invent stories that they may use to manipulate others. They usually come with a compelling charm, which helps them blatantly lie without being questioned. If you become a target of such a liar, you are in danger of being constantly bombarded with false information. The sociopathic liar will not stop until he can make you see things his way. He does not care if he is destructive or if he is hurting people this way. White Liars From time to time, people are compelled to tell white lies. These are factual statements that are embedded with falsehoods. They think that by saying partial truths, they are not really causing any harm. White liars may also not be that happy with what they are doing, but lie anyway to protect someone else, for example. Others, however, may develop a careless and laissez faire attitude, thinking that it is best to keep things nice and breezy with a few lies here and there. Careless Liars Careless liars lie without caring if they get caught or not. There is an almost desperate and sloppy way about it. Such a liar knows that he is lying and that his lie may be blatant, but he just wants to say it to escape whatever at any given point in time. He does not study the details of what he is saying, thus revealing himself to others far too quickly. If you tell the person that you know about his lying, he may not be that concerned. After all, he is just throwing all sorts of statements. Occasional Liars Occasional liars lie from time to time, as the name suggests. Often, they do not mean to do it. The situation sometimes simply calls for it to save face or even their lives. These are the liars that will likely become guilty afterward and may confess their lie when whatever danger is over. How To Deal With Liars Dealing with liars is not a one size fits all kind of thing. You need to know what type of a liar you are talking to first. When you are dealing with a habitual liar, for example, you often feel that you need to end it. You should gently tell the person that you are aware of the lie. However, you need to be calm when telling him this. You should have the moral high ground by being able to logically explain the situation. Most likely, the person knows what it is about, anyway. However, some liars have been so caught up in their fabrications that they no longer recognize the truth. When dealing with someone who may have said one white lie or two, just let them know that you are aware. If the person has not caused irreparable harm with the lie, telling him what you feel about it may suffice. The person may have also told you the lie because he does not want you to get hurt. So, how does knowing who lies and what type of liar he is help? Well, it indeed does not feel right to be lied to. Imagine establishing relationships with people who have only been lying to you the whole time. How would you know if the relationship was genuine in the first place? Knowing who is lying to you will give you some great perspective. You will see who you can rely on. Identifying liars will also give you some excellent arsenal for decision making. As for knowing the types of liars, you could at least know who to forgive, who to forget, and who may need some professional help. Chapter 13: How to Spot and Read Lies In People and Detect Deception Knowing what types of liars there are may not be enough. You must be able to identify them using their words, actions, and mannerisms. People will not immediately tell you — if ever — that they are lying to you. You also cannot live a life automatically assuming everyone is lying to you. That would make for a very lonely life. Spotting lies is not that different from reading body language. You must know what you should be looking for. You must use your eyes and ears to make accurate observations about people. Understanding The Baseline Like before, you must establish and understand a person’s baseline. How does the person usually behave? Does the behavior suddenly change when you detect a lie? By knowing the baseline, you can better understand how a person behaves and why he behaves like that. You may attribute the change to a sudden shift in mood, caused by external sources. On the other hand, the transition may have been brought about by mental turmoil. That mental turmoil could have been caused by the struggle between telling the truth and lying. Hand Movement Hand movement can clue you in as to whether a person is lying or not. The hands are more likely to move too much when someone is lying. A larger percentage of liars move their hands a lot compared to a group of people telling the truth. The palm tends to be facing the person lying, as well. It means that he feels the need to hide something. Hiding a palm is the opposite of an open gesture. There must be a reason for this lack of openness. Itching And Fidgeting When a person is nervous, something happens to him physiologically. He feels all kinds of things: itches, fidgeting, feet shuffling, and rocking back and forth can all be signs that deception is taking place. You may be dealing with a not so experienced liar, however. He may not be that comfortable with lying as he may believe himself to be. Facial Expressions When talking to someone, it is best to observe their faces. Some will reveal a lot about what they are feeling or hiding quite more easily than others. Pressing the lips together to the point of hiding their lips may show that while they may not be lying, they are hiding something. You can consider hiding something a lie of omission, especially if the person is well aware that the fact is something that you must be mindful of. The eyes could be a vital clue, as well. They would shift their gaze when the conversation reaches a possibly precarious point. This movement suggests that there is so much going on in their minds. After all, they are fabricating something — an act of creative treason. Change In Complexion Some may also turn pale when they feel somehow trapped or scared that they may reveal something they don’t want to say or show. So, you may be able to catch people who easily Sweat In The T Zone For example, some people tend to profusely sweat when they are feeling the heat. They cannot hide these involuntary responses that are saying so much more about them. So, be suspicious of people who sweat a lot when it is not incredibly hot. Tone Of Voice Lying people really need to hold on to their words because they can reveal themselves. Their throat feels constricted. So, they end up with a higher pitch voice. This is where your baseline will work. You need to know how their voice generally sound. When a pitchy sound emerges for no physical reason, then you may have to be wary. Something is afoot. Defensive people raise their voices, as well. They cannot control their surging emotions and other physiological factors of lying. So, they end up raising their voices. Some may actually think that they sound more genuine when they act as if they are the victims. The Mouth Above, it has been mentioned that a lying person will press their mouths to hide their lips. This is an act of hiding the truth. But what about direct lying? What can the mouth reveal about those? Well, someone who is lying may purse his lips. It may sound like a cute gesture, but it actually hides the mouth dryness resulting from lying. A person trying to get you to take their side by lying may also look like they are smiling at you. At least his mouth is pulled up on the edges. However, the smile does not reach his eyes. The Words Themselves Of course, to really catch the lies in someone’s words, you need to focus on the words themselves. You cannot just keep on looking at their faces for the clues. Most people do not really have a lot of practice with lying. Those who do lie habitually may not be that concerned about the details in their stories. So, you not only need your eyes, but you also need your ears to make your complete observation. Some common verbal cues that can reveal dishonesty are the following: e Using too many fillers such as “um,” “uh,” and “like” can be a sign of dishonesty. A University of Michigan research has shown that dishonest people use many fillers to give them time to think about how they can get away with what they are saying. Again, this is where a baseline can help you. It is also possible that the person who is talking simply does not have the verbal prowess to speak fluently. e Most people are not natural at lying — thank goodness. So, they may slip up. While the central lie is there, the details may reveal little bits of the truth. Listen to contradictions in their statements. After all, you must bait the fish by the mouth. Isn’t that what the saying says? e Using phrases such as “honestly,” “let me tell you the truth,” and other similar statements that seem to assure the listener of the truth are actually hallmarks of lying. When someone tells the truth, he does not have to try so hard to convince his listener. e The details of the story may also be vague in some instances. They may be more animated in some parts and then more guarded in some. In these cases, you may see how lies and truth are being combined somehow. e Listen well to the rest of the story. If you have some confirmed information about it, then you can dissect the rest of the story to see which parts are lies. e A shift from one tense to the next can suggest the liar distances himself from the situation he is lying about. For example, a person can use the past tense to tell the genuine parts and then shift to the present tense for the fabricated parts. e The liar may also respond with questions. By doing this, he dodges the question and avoids — at least momentarily — lying outright. e When lying about wrongdoing, a person can start using euphemisms to lighten the feel of the act. e The focus of his story may not be balanced. You will notice that there will be many details about some parts, which he is willing to talk about. The vague and poorly detailed parts are the ones that you have to focus on. There is a lie somewhere there, hiding in words, such as “guess,” “supposed,” and other noncommittal terms. Detecting Deception To know who is lying to you, you need to be a keen observer. You must also know which details to focus on. It is indeed easier to detect deception from someone you know well. You already know what the baseline looks and sounds like. With people you have just met, you may need to discuss mundane topics, such as the weather. You may want to hear what the person sounds like when voicing opinions on religion, politics, and slightly more touchy subjects. Why do you need to do that? With lies, the person will be more careful not to reveal his feelings. What if you are talking to someone who has a tendency to flaunt himself? If you are talking to a usually self absorbed person, start to wonder when he starts steering away from being associated with anything. He stops saying “me” and “I.” A person who is lying will start washing his hands off any wrongdoing. He will start talking about other people who may or may not be involved with the issue he is lying about. Any significant change in tone, gestures, and mood should be spotted. You must also be on the lookout for head shaking. Imagine a person saying something crucial, and he is shaking his head at the same time. Does it make sense in the context? Is he shaking his head in disbelief? Listen to what he is saying. If the statement backs this theory, perhaps the person is just coming to terms with something. If, on the other hand, the person is giving you information while shaking his head, he is unwittingly saying that he is lying. A person can also inadvertently reveal that he is lying by looking bored and unenthusiastic. Again, you could get some help by having a baseline of the person’s behavior. If he is a person who tends to look bored all the time, anyway, then perhaps he is just being his usual self. However, an ordinarily emotional and excitable person quieting down with vague comments, and a poker faced is suspicious. Knowing for sure a person is lying can be challenging, especially if you don’t have access to any of the facts involved. If the person is not close to you, then you will have problems establishing the baseline. The unscientific gut feeling may work in some cases. You just know that there is something wrong with is being said to you. Investigating before jumping to conclusions may be the right thing to do, but it is possible to catch the liar through his own stories. If you feel up to confronting your suspect more subtly, then you may request the person to tell the story in reverse. You don’t have to ask him that exactly or else he may get suspicious of your methods. Chapter 14: What About Me a a N Me A So, how about you? What is your role in the matter? You are reading this book so that you can read and analyze people better. Most of the chapters have dealt with what other people can reveal about themselves. Sometimes, the facial expressions and gestures are too obvious that you immediately spot them. However, what can you actively contribute to the interaction? What Can You do to Contribute to the Interaction and Ease the Analysis Active listening and Being a Better Listener Listen. You should not just hear what the sounds are like. You have to listen carefully to what the person is saying — and not saying. Look at the person talking to show that you are listening. Engage in the conversation, by asking your own questions and contributing to the topic. When the person answers, listen as well. Some people just ask questions for the sake of asking questions. If the person is sharing something important about himself, then provide the support that he needs. By being a better listener, you: e Forge better relationships e Demonstrate respect e Accumulate more valuable information e Allow communication to successfully occur. So, how do you become a better listener? Here are some ways: Be Fully Present (Dos And Don'ts) Set your devices aside and give your time. When you need to listen, do not attempt to multitask. Distracted Listening As with the previous point, do not get distracted by other possible tasks and by devices. Listen well to understand and not just so you can make a response. Some people are even bent on making a biting retort. Clear Your Mind You may have other concerns or worries. For the time being, though, focus on the other person. Do not let other issues affect communication. No Judgments Or Agenda (Dos And Don ts) When you are not listening, be impartial. Do not do so that you can judge afterward. Listen to the details so that you will better understand the other person. It must mean something for him to be opening up. Do not listen just so you can respond in a bragging manner, making the other person feel bad. Question Your Motivation To do this, use the W.A.I.T. (Why am I talking) method? Do you really have to? Perhaps it is time to stop and listen but without any hidden agenda? Show You Are Listening Make sure the other person can clearly tell you are listening. You may nod in agreement. Do not depend on this alone. It can seem automatic and thoughtless. Do not talk until you feel the other person is ready to listen and have said his piece. When it is your turn, refer to the points that he has mentioned. Refer to those instead of starting your own story. Listen To Learn When you have the intention to learn, you will listen eagerly. You will be careful to note the most essential points. Your brain is actively finding methods to keep the information in. During a lecture, writing down the salient details can help. In a personal conversation, you can ask more questions to find out more about the fact you are intrigued by. Shake Hands To Trigger A Connection They say that a firm handshake establishes who you are in a positive light. This depends, however, on who you are establishing contact with. If the other person has a higher position, then you may have to follow his way of shaking hands. No matter what you do, however, keep the handshake vertical. Now, shaking hands is the best way to boost a connection. It is better than a nod or a fist bump, especially in a more formal situation. The contact creates a rush of oxytocin, which helps in the formation of a bond. While the handshake is at the fore of the connection, you should also create suitable eye contact. Being able to connect with the other person’s eyes directly provides you with a more confident persona. For job candidates, this just may be a way for you to be remembered amid the several handshakes. A big no no when it comes to shaking hands is to do so with wet, clammy hands. You may be nervous, but you should not announce it to the world. So, make sure that your palms are dry and at just the right temperature. Smile To Promote Good Feelings A genuine smile brightens the day — both for you and the person you are smiling at. However, something else more elaborate is going on within you. A smile creates a rush of positive neurotransmitters: oxytocin, serotonin, dopamine, and neuropeptides. They lift your mood to make the day feel a lot more joyous. Endorphins also help as a pain reliever. So, you basically give yourself a chemical mood boost naturally. A genuine smile can also create a positive effect on people around you. It can make a general sense of wellbeing. Keep Your Voice Low For An Authoritative Sound You may think that shouting all the time is the answer. However, you can actually take a tone of authority by lowering your voice. It seems that people with deep voices command more attention. In fact, you may notice that actors with deep voices are usually assigned to narrate documentaries. Morgan Freeman may come to mind. Unfortunately, we cannot just decide to have a more resonant voice. It is not something that you can just will yourself to have. You have to be born with this voice. If you need the voice for social media posting purposes, then vocal changing apps can help you out. You can also tweak your own voice to make it sound authoritative. In real life, listen to your voice more closely. How do you sound? What type of voice do you have? Is it physically possible to lower the tone to suit the style that you need? Practice humming. By humming, you can get in contact with your voice’s deeper tone. It relaxes your throat and allows you to be more flexible with how you sound. If making your voice deeper is an impossibility, then you can just work on your inflection. Being confident and adding the appropriate emotion to what you are doing should help you get your message across — and powerfully at that! Positive Body Language You can now read most of the usual nonverbal cues. If you are dealing with regular people, not spies, and master liars, then you should be able to spot what people really mean. However, you must also be able to convey the right body language. How do you make someone feel welcome? Obviously, you cannot cross your arms to talk to a person and expect him to feel secure around you. How could he? You are blocking his communication. If you want to present yourself as a trustworthy and competent leader, then you must manifest confidence. Here are some signs of a positive body language, thus representing a positive person: e Straight back/good posture e Eye contact e Focused listening e Open hands (not hidden) e Body positioned towards the listener e Micro expressions suggesting a smile or another open facial expression. Body Language During Public Speaking When you are doing public speaking, you have to take your positive body language up to another level. You will be in front of a crowd, large or small. There may be a Stage or just an open area where you can stand and address the audience. Whatever the case may be, you must be able to establish rapport and authority. So, you must keep the positive stances that you have learned. Your voice should be clear. It does not have to be too loud, but you can make use of a shifting pace and volume. A monotonous voice can be tedious. Watch the audience. Address the crowd directly. Make eye contact if possible, but look at their foreheads instead if you are too nervous. Body Language During Interviews An interview should make you establish a rapport with the other person, whether you are the interviewer or the interviewee. So, you must use all the usual communication strategies that you can use, except you will use them in a more formal setting. You begin and end an interview with a handshake. Again, your palms must be dry. You should not keep it longer than it is comfortable. If the other person keeps your hand for an extended period, use your other hand to gently tap his hand. You can use all that you learned in the previous chapters. For example, you must not fidget, or you will come across as nervous. The interviewer may suspect that you are anxious because a) you are lying, or b) you are not confident. So, it is also best to avoid crossing your legs. It may sound like a great idea at first, but you will realize it is not as soon as your legs fall asleep. When you shift to a different position to alleviate the situation, it may look like you are fidgety. Body Language For Seduction Refer to the chapter on how to spot a romantic interest. Do you suspect someone is giving you the eye, and you want to reciprocate and move things to the next level? Then, you need to know the body language for seduction. First, you must make sure you stand out. This is why you must conduct a little research. What is attractive to this other person? Are you already pleasing to him or her — but you just need to confirm things? Second, expose your best assets. Displaying of the wrists or the collarbone can be an example of this. Preening gestures can also work: mussing the hair, touching the face, and fixing clothes. Third, take action. Make sure you do something that will be noticed. You can bend down low to pick up something. It may be a rom com cliché, but it does work. Fourth, mirror the actions of the person that you desire. This is a more blatant way of saying you desire him or her. Body Language Techniques For Negotiations And Sales How you behave when you are selling a product or service will decide your success. The eye contact and handshake will again work here. You should also keep away your hands from your face. Do not make gestures that seem to suggest you are lying or hiding something. While you may have mastered the craft of talking, you should also listen. Your client or business partner will want to know that they are being heard. They will appreciate the respect and appreciation. Body Language Techniques And Tips For Teachers Whether you are teaching college age kids or primary schoolers, you must be expressive. You don’t want your learners to feel bored and worn down early in the day. Keep yourself upbeat and confident. You need high energy to pep and inspire children to learn. Always show that you believe in them, even when the going gets tough. Do not hide your hands. Showing your hands will tell them that you have nothing to hide and that you can be trusted. Body Language Mistakes To Avoid At this point in time, this part is basically a summary of what you have already learned. Some nonverbal cues will put you in a bad light. So, avoid these: e Hiding your hands (untrustworthy!) e Slouching (diffident) e Weak handshake (unmotivated, not confident) e Too much or too little eye contact (from uncomfortable to hiding something or being shy) e Fidgeting (nervous) e Pointing away your feet from the person you are talking to (not interested) e Touching your face (dishonest!) e Watching the clock (bored) Of course, the above can have a different meaning depending on the context of the situation. However, you don’t want the other person to collate all the details to come to the right conclusion. What Is My Communication Style? To better know how to make your verbal and nonverbal cues work, you must analyze your communication style. Here are the four main types: e Analytical This means that you like hard data. You enjoy analyzing them, but do not have the patience for vague terms. Your communication is dispassionate. e Intuitive This means that you look at the big picture, but do not like to be bogged down with the details. So, you want to get to the point of every conversation. e Functional This means that you like to go through the process in detail. You are good at implementing the details of a task because you love to look at it step by step. e Personal This means that you value emotional bonds. So, you connect with people on a personal level when you communicate with them. You don’t just pass on a message, but you also make sure it resonates with your listener. Reverse these learnings and they will help you in analyzing the person you want. Conclusion People are complicated beings. It is safe to say that you cannot thoroughly learn a person’s innermost thoughts on your first try. It takes continuous observation and follow through. You also need to willingly engage in communication. For you to read and analyze other people, you must also keep an open stance. Do not block the information that people are willingly and unwillingly revealing about themselves. Every day that you connect with someone, beyond your devices, you get a closer look at human nature. You investigate the intricacies of every facial line and every slight gesture. People are fascinating subjects. Do not let machines take over the beauty of communicating on a personal level. The more practice that you have, the closer you will be to dissecting the nuances of each person. When you do that, you will find yourself able to interact better for more successful relationships, careers, and a general sense of human connectivity. Body Language Speed Read People, Detect Deceit, Understand the Hidden Meaning Behind People's Gestures And Expressions. Learn To Use Body Language to Influence, Persuade And Convey The Right Message By Psychology Ed Academy & Carl Goleman Contents — Body Language Part 1 — The Origins and How to Read and Understand Body Language What is Body Language Chapter 2: Cultural Variations in Gestures and Body Language Cultural Basics are the Same Differences in Greetings Meeting Someone with a Different Culture from Yours Popular Facial Expressions and Their Meanings Hand Gestures Eye Contact Should You Touch? Bottomline Chapter 4: Hands The Importance of Hands in Body Language Non Verbal Signals Chapter 5: Handshakes A Quick History Non Verbal Signals Chapter 6: Arms The Importance of Arms in Bo Areal Arni signals Non Chapter 7: Legs and Feet Importance of Legs and Feet in Body Lan Language uilding Blocks , excitement, anger, Hi hing may mean fear and tiredness. A eee aan 7 a aig of sadness, hopelessness, or relief. Chapter 15: Posture and Body Language Different categories of body movement Posi ure sive Body_Language Language Ser Body La » Dominance and Submissiveness j: Torso and Body Language | Space and Body Lang Applicati ons ay People Ma M ay and love (attraction) C aaa The “Starter” Position The DeAnna i Handsh ike Be Mindful of Your Gestures Personal Distance Your Exit Chapter 23: Body Language for Seduction Gettin etting Their Pren Tr Mick oe a Copyright, Legal Notice and Disclaimer Copyright 2020 All rights reserved In no way it is legal to reproduce, duplicate, or transmit any part of this document in either electronic means or in printed format. Recording of this publication is strictly prohibited and any storage of this document is not allowed unless with written permission from the publisher. All rights reserved. The information provided herein is stated to be truthful and consistent, in that any liability, in terms of inattention or otherwise, by any usage or abuse of any policies, processes, or directions contained within is the solitary and utter responsibility of the recipient reader. Under no circumstances will any legal responsibility or blame be held against the publisher for any reparation, damages, or monetary loss due to the information herein, either directly or indirectly. Respective authors own all copyrights not held by the publisher. Legal Notice This book is copyright protected. This is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part of the content within this book without the consent of the author or copyright owner. Legal action will be pursued if this is breached. art 1 — The Origins and How to Read and nderstand Body Language The use of and study of body language dates back to prehistory and even pre language times. Early inhabitants didn’t know how to verbally communicate. All they did was to communicate using non verbal signals. There are signals that are universal. Everyone knows that smiling indicates happiness or satisfaction, while crying may mean having a feeling of sadness or pain. This section will discuss the origins of body language. You will learn facts and understand the whole concept. Learning more about body language, how to use it, and how to interpret it, will help you improve your relationships with others. Chapter 1: The Origins of Body Language Is body language something we learn or is it something we were born with? There is no definite answer to this question because of these two reasons: 16. Body language evolved over time in response to the social needs of humans. For instance, nobody taught you to scowl when you are angry. It just came naturally. 17. Body language is divided into several groups. There are reactions and gestures that are inborn and are universal. On the other hand, there are those that people learn through observation, and some change with age and use. For example, somebody might have told you that having proper posture conveys a positive image. Origins of Body Language Over 5 million years ago, approximately 100,000 chimps lived in equatorial Africa. The forests of Africa were starting to dwindle. The climate was hot and dry. These inhabitants were starting to have difficulty finding food and the trees have become inadequate for them. They had to learn to adapt so they could survive. Evidence about walking apes was said to have been seen about 4.4 million years ago. Having learned how to walk, these Australopithecines were able to cover a bigger area and find a large variety of food. This ability gave them an evolutionary advantage. But as they reach expanded, life became more complicated. They started to learn to work in groups to cope with the changes in their environment. They had to learn to interact with others, to know who is an ally and who is an enemy. They had to decide who should be in their group and who are to be excluded. It was mentally challenging for them. Those who had a smaller brain didn’t survive. During this time, the Homo habilis appeared. They had bigger brains. But having bigger brains meant they needed more energy. They diversified their food choices and they learned to use stone tools too. Around 2.5 million years ago, their body still had fur. Part of their socialization was checking out each other’s fur. There were about 50 members in each group. This continued until about 1.7 million years. The size of their brain increased until about 800cc. The increase in their brain size caused also an increase in their body temperature. Eventually, they lost their hair and fur. They developed sweat glands to adapt. In the absence of fur, their skin darkened because of UV radiation. This ushered in the emergence of the Homo egaster. This time saw the beginning of a social shift to male and female bonds. They still lived in groups of 50 and all communication within the group was through the use of body language. The Homo erectus emerged about 1 million years ago. They started to spread out of Africa. About 500,000 years ago, the second migration by Homo Heidelbergensis to Europe started. This led to the emergence of the Neanderthals some 400,000 years ago. It is interesting to note that the Neanderthals had bigger brains than modern day humans. They were more muscular and seemed superior to all other “humans”. Some 200,000 years ago, our own ancestors, the Homo sapiens emerged. They were anatomically modern and had a brain size of about 1350+cc. The Homo sapiens evolved to modern day humans some 50,000 years ago. This is a huge time in history as this is the major turning point with the birth of language. They faced critical issues during the process of developing a language because of reliability. Primates still used sounds to communicate. Problems arose because it was hard to determine if they could trust a signal or not. There was always a possibility of the primates faking the signal to benefit themselves. These primates didn’t adhere to the concept of morality. This led to the use of emotionally expressive signals — these are hard to fake. For humans to be able to communicate without the dangers of deception, they had to create a society around moral regulation. Language and rituals had to co evolve simultaneously. To know if someone was honest or not, society had to refer to that person’s belief and adherence to a particular ritual — this was how religion started. At this point, humans have begun using body language together with verbal signals as a way to communicate with one another. To self regulate and prevent deception, they develop religion and rituals. Humans who believed in religion were deemed more trustworthy. This was how groups were formed. Groups had to learn how to compete against each other to gain access to more resources, gain power, and reproduce and eventually expand. This was also the period when different superstitions came about. Those people who believed in the same superstitions are deemed part of the same group or belief system. Language enabled humans to increase their groups from 50 to 150. They have learned to verbally conduct social grooming. This also ushered in vocal grooming, which in modern times is called gossip. Around 50,000 years ago, a small group of humans left Africa and traveled across Asia and Europe. They spread rapidly that about 14,500 years ago, all the other Homo genus became extinct, except for the more superior Homo sapiens. What is Body Language Body language is a major aspect of modern communications and relationships. From our own facial expressions to the movements made by our body, the things that are not said can still convey loads of information. Experts say that body language may make up about 60% to 65% of all communication. Learning and understanding body language is important, but it is important that you also take into consideration other clues like context and circumstances. In most cases, you should try looking at the signals as a whole rather than focusing on just a single action. Understanding how body language works involve learning how to interpret different consistent signals to support or indicate a specific conclusion. Body language is such a powerful concept. We have learned that Body language is more than just brief descriptions. It encompasses where the body is in relation to the other bodies (this is known as “personal space”). Body language is composed of different body movements, like eye movements and facial expressions. Additionally, body language also covers everything that we communicate using our body aside from the spoken words, thus encompassing breathing, blood pressure, pulse, blushing, perspiration, etc. So, body language can be defined as the unconscious and conscious transmission and interpretation of our feelings, our moods, and attitudes, through the following: e Posture, movement, position, physical state, and relationship to other bodies or objects. e Facial expressions and even the simplest eye movement. Chapter 2: Cultural Variations in Gestures and Body Language S oaro’ < k V8 > rms my, 7 < With the many different cultures, customs, traditions, and regions come the differences in gestures and body language. You can’t expect other cultures to adopt your customs, just as you may not be willing to adopt theirs. This fact will determine how you deal with other people from a culture different from yours. Would you compromise your culture or force others to accept yours? It may be difficult to understand a foreign language, but signs (like body language and gestures) are a powerful communicator. Sometimes people may not understand what the other person is saying but when it comes to non verbal communication, an understanding may come easier. People should learn to be more sensitive, more observant, and more aware of a variety of body languages, gestures, and actions that happens every day. Respect is an important aspect of establishing a relationship with somebody that has a different culture from yours. People should be willing to learn, understand, and respect each other’s culture and traditions. Some gestures and body language are obvious, but most of the time they are subtle. “Silent” body language is indeed powerful. Whether you are working in a culturally diverse company or simply want to understand a neighbor or a new friend, understanding what people want to say by interpreting their body language can be quite a challenge. Cultural Basics are the Same A smile may have the same meaning to people anywhere around the world. People almost have the same facial expression when they are angry or annoyed, or when they are sad or afraid. Body language is generally common to a lot of people in most parts of the world. Differences in cultures are mainly about territorial space, touch frequency, eye contact, and even insult gestures. It is important to take note that the regions with the highest number of different local signals are the many Arab countries, Japan, and some parts of Asia. In this chapter, we look into the different body language meanings from all over the world. For example, you greet someone with a simple handshake, but other cultures consider a handshake as taboo and have a different way to greet others. We will learn more about this here. Differences in Greetings To clearly understand one another, it is just appropriate to find out the meaning of specific gestures among every culture. Have you tried extending your hand for a handshake and the other person doesn’t take it? If you meet a lot of foreigners, you’ve probably experienced a few embarrassing and funny culture encounters — and we’re only talking about a simple handshake here. Americans, Germans, New Zealanders, British, and Australians will usually extend a hand for a handshake upon meeting and then again another one when it’s time to bid goodbye. Many European cultures normally shake hands with each other several times daily. Some French are even known to shake hands for up to 30 minutes a day. On the other hand, Arabic and Asian cultures may continue holding your hand even after the handshake has ended. French and Germans normally give one or two firm pumps followed by a short hold. The Brits, however, give 3 to 5 pumps against American’s of 5 to 7 pumps. Imagine going to a conference with attendees from different countries and you see different kinds of handshakes. Some cultures kiss each other as a form of greeting one another. Scandinavians are okay with a simple kiss. While the French mostly prefer a double, while Arabs, Dutch, and Belgians usually kiss 3times. Brits may avoid kissing by standing back or will surprise you if you get a double European kiss. Often, Americans, New Zealanders, and Australians are still confused to this day on this form of greeting each other. Meeting Someone with a Different Culture from Yours When Italians are talking, they like keeping their hands held high. An affectionate arm touching in an Italian conversation is a way of stopping the other person (listener) from raising their hands and start talking. To interrupt an Italian who is talking, you have to grab his hands in mid air and then bring them down. Someone say that British and the Germans are intimidated when they have to talk with French and Italians because they are rarely allowed to speak. The French use their forearms and hands while talking. British and Germans normally stand at attention, while Italians use their whole arms and body. The Famous English Upper Lip The pursed lip gesture is a way to control facial expressions to show as little emotions as possible. This facial expression can communicate to others that the person in complete control. During the funeral march for Diana in 1997, Prince Charles, Harry, and William kept a stiff upper lip expression as they walk behind Diana’s coffin. Some people who do not understand this expression conclude that these men were not affected by the tragic event. King Henry VIII was also known for this upper lip expression. The pursed lip gesture is still being used today. Popular Facial Expressions and Their Meanings Many facial expressions are universal. Facial expressions are often used to show emotions: e Happiness — often done by raising and lowering the corners of the mouth while the cheeks are raised and the muscles around the eyes become tight. e Sadness — the corners of the mouth are lowered. Some even raise an inner portion of their brows. e Surprise — often, the eyebrows are arched, and the eyelids are pulled up. The mouth is open. e Fear —the brows are often arched and pulled together. The eyes are wide open, and the mouth is slightly open. e Anger — the brows are often lowered as the eyes appear to be bulging, and the lips are firmly pressed. e Disgust — the brows are lowered. The upper lip is often raised while the nose is wrinkled. Both cheeks may appear to be raised. Hand Gestures Often, people use hand gestures to prove or emphasize a point, and they can have different meanings across different cultures. For instance, an “ok” sign may be a harmless expression in the US, but in Spain, Brazil, or Greece, this means you are calling another person an a**hole, while in Turkey it means an insult to gay people. In Europe and the USA, a thumbs up sign means a job well done, but in the Middle East and in Greece, they may mean “up yours”. It is common in the United States to curl the index finger with the palm facing up when trying to ask someone to come closer. However, it is a rude gesture in Malaysia, China, the Philippines, Singapore, and East Asia. It is also impolite to use this gesture when you are talking with other people because most people believe that this gesture is used to beckon dogs in most Asian countries. The V sign is a common hand signal in New Zealand, Australia, and Great Britain. It carries an “up yours” interpretation. In World War II, Winston Churchill popularized this signal to mean victory, but his version was with his palm facing outward. The version wherein the palm is facing towards the person doing it is an obscene insult. In some parts of Europe, the V sign facing in still means “victory”. An Englishman flashing the V sign to a German to tell him “up yours” might lead the German into thinking that he’d won a prize. Still, the sign means “two” in other parts of Europe, so if there is a European bartender, his response to the Englishman or American would be two mugs of beer. Eye Contact In many western countries, making eye contact with another person means you are attentive and confident. When one looks away while talking to you, the general assumption is they are not interested and they are looking for someone else to speak to. In the Middle East, eye contact beyond a simple glance between a man and a woman is inappropriate. In Latin America, Africa, and in many parts of Asia, direct eye contact is considered to be confrontational and aggressive. These cultures observe hierarchy. Avoiding eye contact is a sign of respect for their elders and superiors. Children won’t make eye contact with an adult talking to them, the same goes for employees to their superiors (bosses). Should You Touch? The Far East and Northern Europe are considered to be “non contact cultures”. There is little to no physical contact than a short handshake with people whom they don’t know well. Even a simple accidental brushing of another person’s arm on the street would warrant an apology. On the other hand, Southern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East are considered to be “high contact cultures”. For them, physical touch is a huge part of socializing. In most Arab countries, men can hold hands and kiss each other as a form of greeting. However, men cannot do the same with a woman. In Laos and Thailand, touching anyone’s head, even children is taboo. In South Korea, the elders can touch younger people, especially when the elderly needs help in getting through a big crown. The younger ones cannot do the same for their elders. On the other hand, Italians and French love to touch one another as they talk, but the British prefer not to have physical contact unless in a sports event with a large audience. New Zealand, and Britain usually embrace. This gesture was copied by Continental and American sportsmen who kiss and embrace each other upon scoring a goal. This may continue in their dressing rooms. Bottomline If you are visiting a country or you’re meeting a foreigner for the first time, you should first learn about their culture. If you are visiting a country and you’re not sure how to behave, you may ask the locals for tips on how things are done there. Cultural misrepresentation of non verbal signs can result in embarrassing situations. It is important to learn more about the new country you are visiting. Learning more about another person and their culture would be helpful to avoid offending your host country or another person. Chapter 3: The Four Main Types of Body one ae Ye! NY AE MLN YM ea sisi, Nana ENSE he way you act and the way your body moves can provide clues about who you really are. Without the use of words, we communicate non verbally via our body language, whether we are aware of it or not. The way you move, sit, stand, and walk may be able to help you understand who you really are. Each one of us expresses our body language in one of four ways: rae light and bouncy movement soft and fluid movement precise and bold movement dynamic and determined movement. Each of these movements has its own meanings and may coincide with one of the four types of energy. Energy profiling is a profiling system that is based on movement. Everything in your natural world has a corresponding dominant energy type. The two most powerful assessment tools used to discover your energy type are your body language and your facial features. To help you further understand, this chapter teaches you what the four types of body language are. Type 1: Upward, light animated You “sashay” with a buoyant and bouncy spring in your steps. You sit and stand with many different movements, and you shift your position quite often. You may come off as restless to others because you don’t like being confined to an office desk and sitting and standing still for long periods. You are often seen sitting with your legs crisscrossed, or comfortably flat on the floor. Type 2: Fluid, flowing, soft You have a graceful walk that is soft and classy. You are likely to take longer steps while keeping your feet close to the ground. There is an obvious absence of bouncing while walking, instead, your movements are fluid and flowing naturally. You sit and you stand in the shape of an S curve or you are relaxed holding your head on the side. Type 3: Active, reactive, substantial You walk confidently and full of determination. Your steps are quick and brisk. People can hear you coming. They can even hear you sit because your movements are quite deliberate. You create different angles when you sit and stand. Your legs are often crossed, with one leg pulled up under you. Your head is usually cocked to the side, while your hands are on your waist. You may also have your body bent at the waist. Type 4: Bold, constant, still Your walk is stately and upright. Your limbs and body have little movements while you walk. You sit upright too, with a straight posture, with your feet firmly on the ground and your hands are either folded or hanging to your sides. You project a proper and formal look when you sit and stand. Runway models are the dominant Type 4 Energy. They are naturally poised, erect, upright, and structured in their movements. They maintain a perfect posture, with their back and shoulders straight up. Chapter 4: Hands L The Importance of Hands in Body Language A scientific study shows that there are more nerve connections between the hands and the brain than between any other part of your body. That being said, the gestures and positions of your hands may give powerful insights into your emotional state. Hand gestures are almost always the easiest to pick up. Your hand movements may reveal your real feelings toward another person, situation, or place, whether you are aware of these movements or not. Non verbal signals involving the hands are extensive because the hands are “expressive” as these interact with the other body parts. Hands are used quite often in emphasizing a point (consciously) or inexpressive hidden feelings and emotions (unconsciously). Hands are used for a variety of purposes, the most notable are: e Emphasis — jabbing, chopping, and pointing actions e Specific conscious signals including the American OK sign, the V for Victory sign, the thumbs up sign, as well as for rude gestures e Illustration — shaping, drawing, mimicking actions, or sizing things in the air e Greeting others and waving goodbye e And more interesting signals that you do unconsciously including fiddling with pens or touching your face or your chin, which may indicate feelings of pressure, expectation, deceit, doubt, and openness. A lot of body language experts are one in saying that the hands send more signals than any other part of the body, except probably the face. It is safe to conclude that studying the hands will yield information. There are a lot of cultural differences in terms of hand signals. For this section of the book, we focus on Western behavior. Non Verbal Signals Signal Palms up (open) Palms up, with fingers pointing upward Palms down Possible Meaning/s Honesty Truthfulness Trying to appeal a case May mean submissiveness Giving instruction to stop Being defensive May indicate strength, dominance, and authority. Details This is said to be a variation of the open palm gesture to show that no weapon is held. This is a common hand gesture that can be interpreted differently. It can also mean “I have no answer for that”. It can also mean an appeal. In some instances, this hand signal may imply confidence or trustworthiness. However, it can easily be a fake gesture to convey innocence. The outward open forearms are a more extreme version of the hand gesture. If the hands are relaxed, it may indicate being defensive. Having rigid fingers may mean more authoritative instruction. It may also indicate making a request to stop whatever one is saying. Where the lower arm may move across the body with the palm down may indicate fierce defiance or disagreement. Palms up (with up and down movements, like trying to determine the weight of something) Could mean looking for an answer. While the hand is empty, figuratively speaking, it is holding an idea or an issue, as if trying to weigh in. The signal means “weighing” the possibilities. One hand (or both hands) touching the left side of the chest as if holding the heart. May mean the person holding the heart is asking for the other person to believe them. This signal is quite easy to fake. The underlying meaning for this signal is that the person wants to be believed, it doesn’t matter if they are sincere with the gesture or not. Placing the hand on the heart can be proactive, like when a salesperson is trying to close a sale. It can also be reactive when one is claiming to be innocent. Regardless, the person making the signal typically feels there is a need to emphasize their position, as if it is life threatening, which actually is not. Index finger pointing at the other person It can be a sign of aggression, a threat, or trying to make a point. When another person points a finger at you, you might feel threatened. This hand gesture is confrontational and dictatorial. You commonly see adults do this to young people as if scolding their child. The index finger is said to be a substitute for a gun or any pointed weapon. This hand signal is often associated with aggression towards another person. A variation of the finger pointing, this time accompanied by a wink Index finger pointing in the air Wagging of the finger from side to side It may mean confirmation or acknowledgment as if saying “okay”. May indicate emphasis. It may be a warning or a refusal (another way of saying “no” The subtle wink while pointing the index finger takes on a whole new meaning. It becomes an acknowledgement, usually on a remark made by someone. The hand signal becomes a positive gesture, like telling the other person that you understood what they are trying to say. It’s like saying, “well done”. This hand gesture generally means trying to drive home a point. A person of authority or power may be trying to emphasize an important announcement or policy. Rather than making a lengthy statement of warning or refusal, a person of authority may simply wag their finger from side to side as if saying, “no, stop it,” or “do as you are told.” Wagging of the finger up and down The hand “chop” Clenched fist/s May mean admonishment or emphasis. It may mean you are trying to emphasize the last point (or word) you just made. It is a form of resistance or aggression. It may also indicate that you are determined to make a point. The hand gesture is like pressing a button on a keyboard a couple of times. It may appear as if when an elevator seems to be not working and you keep on pressing a button a number of times as if it can make a difference. The signal may mean you are trying to emphasize a point, or you are scolding another person. The hand is used to imitate a guillotine, as if you are trying to “kill” the discussion, or you are trying to end the discussion. A clenched fist may convey a variety of feelings — offensive, defensive, negative, positive. It actually depends on the context and other accompanying signals. When one clenches their fist, it may mean they are ready for “battle”. But it can also indicate a feeling of resolve. “Steepling” — the five fingertips on both hands are touching each other The steepled fingers are pointing forward Palms down with up and down movements, while fingers are spread out Cracking your knuckles Clenched interwoven fingers that are The index finger and the thumb touch at the tips It can mean expressing a feeling of thoughtfulness. It can also indicate the feeling of trying to look for connection or engagement with other people. This gesture can mean thoughtfulness or forming a barrier. It may mean losing control of a group or a situation. It may also come across as someone is asking or seeking for calmness. It’s a comforting habit. It can also indicate one is asking for attention. It can be a sign of having feelings of anxiety, frustration, disappointment, and negativity. It may mean a feeling of satisfaction as if saying “ok”. People in deep thought can be seen doing this hand gesture. Only the fingertips touch. The fingers are spread and can be straight up or curved. The hand gesture, when directed forward, may act as a defensive barrier between the thinker and the other people around them. You might catch someone doing the gesture in the middle of a rowdy meeting, usually when the participants are gathered around the table. Teachers often use this hand gesture to try to quieting their class. Men usually do this. It can be something they are used to doing. Its meaning will depend on the context. It can actually mean nothing, just some guy trying to stretch their fingers or hands. Normally, the hands are on the table or they are held across the stomach. Basically, it means “ok”. This is similar to a thumbs up gesture. It could be a superior trying to express approval to a subordinate who just submitted before the deadline or as appreciation for doing a good job. Thumbs up sign It may convey a positive feeling. It’s like agreeing with someone. It can also mean that you have approved a proposal for a project. Westerners use it to say “ok”, or “you did good.” The thumbs up sign usually has a positive connotation. The hand gesture can be done with both hands to make an emphasis. Thumbs down sign Thumbs are clenched inside the fist The hand is held horizontally, rocked side by side It is a sign of disapproval, distaste, or failure. This can be a sign of insecurity, frustration, or trying to comfort one’s self. It may indicate having feelings of indecision. It’s like someone is looking for balance in their own life. It is the opposite of the thumbs up sign which has a positive connotation. With the thumbs down sign, it can mean “not good ”. This gesture dates back to the time of the gladiator games done in ancient Roman arenas. It has a negative meaning in all aspects. This may indicate self comforting. It’s as if reassuring one’s self that they have done well. On the flip side, it can have negative feelings, like feelings of insecurity, disappointment, or frustration. This hand gesture can be a sign of trying to make a decision, but nothing seems to come into mind. Hence, it can lead to having feelings of frustration, regret, even abandonment. Rubbing hands with one another | It may mean having feelings of | This is a sign of having a positive excitement, and even relish. anticipation, expectation. It’s as if waiting for a reward or a gift. Generally, it’s a positive hand gesture. Hand/s are clamped over the mouth (hand covering the mouth) Hands touching the nose while speaking Scratching the while speaking nose Pinching nose while listening to another person speak It can mean shock. It is highly likely that the other person is lying or exaggerating things. It can mean that the speaker is lying and trying to hide it. Or it can also mean a way of exaggerating things. It can be a feeling of thoughtfulness. It can also mean suppression. This hand gesture may connote the feeling of hearing something (like the news) for the first time. It’s like discovering something out of the ordinary. It’s a positive kind of shock. Some say people do this to hide their nose that has started to redden. Experts say that this gesture might have been derived from the story of Pinocchio wherein his wooden nose will grow if Pinocchio tells a lie. Scratching the nose while speaking may be a warning sign unless the speaker only has an itchy nose. Unconsciously this is a gesture of holding or delaying an opinion. Picking nose It can be a sign of daydreaming or being inattentive. It can also mean someone is stressed out. Another meaning is that one is socially disconnected. This is quite common, but it is supposedly done in private only. It usually has a negative impact on the person witnessing it being done by another person. Pinching the bridge of their nose It may be an indication of a negative evaluation. This gesture is normally accompanied by a long single blink of the eyes. Both hands are clamped on each ear It can indicate resistance to something or someone. It may also be a form of rejection. This hand gesture may mean a reluctance to listen to what the other person is saying. It can also indicate a refusal to agree with someone. This is usually directed towards the person talking as if saying they don’t want to hear the speaker’s opinions. Tugging off the ear This may be indicative of a feeling of indecision. It can also mean self comforting. Many people would unconsciously touch their own bodies when trying to look for comfort. Ear pulling may also be a sign of being indecisive. This may also mean that the person wearing this doing this is in deep thought. Hands clasped over their head It can be an indication of experiencing a problem. Clasping the head is like forming a protective helmet against a potential danger or problem. The hand is stroking the chin Face or chin being supported by the hand/s It indicates thoughtfulness. It can be a sign of boredom or tiredness. It can also be a sign of having deep thoughts. A similar signal is stroking the beard in men. The forearm is usually in a vertical position to support the elbow resting on a table. Someone doing this could be in thinking or assessing or evaluating what actions to take. If the gesture appears to be heavier or more prolonged, it can be an indication that the person is tired or bored. The chin is resting on the thumb, while the index finger is pointing upwards against the face Fingers scratching the neck It is an indication of thinking or evaluation. It may mean having feelings of doubt and disbelief. The elbow is resting on a table. The person could be contemplating or assessing what to do next. Generally, the gesture is done one doubts what is being said and done. Hand clasping the wrist It can be a sign of frustration. The position of the hand could indicate frustration. The person may be holding themselves back. Running the hands through the hair It is an indication of flirting or vexation. It can also mean having feelings of exasperation or frustration. It is quite common for someone to run their hand through their hair to flirt with another person. It can also mean that the person is upset or frustrated about something or a situation. Hand/s resting on hip/s on each side It is an indication that the person doing it is confident and ready. It can also mean announcing their availability. The person is just showing their boss that they are ready and doesn’t need to wait for a year or two. Both hands in the pockets It can be an indication of disinterest or boredom. It can also indicate a lack of apathy. This hand gesture has a negative connotation. Removing eyeglasses The person could be signaling their intention to speak or be heard. This is true particularly for people who wear eyeglasses for reading purposes only. It’s as if they are announcing their intention to get up and talk. Similar gestures include raising a hand or taking a breath. Playing with an imaginary violin It may mean having feelings of sadness. This hand gesture is patterned to the traditional use of the violin music as background for sad or emotional scenes in moves. The thumb and fingers forming a tube and rocked from side to side or up and down. Men are usually seen doing this. V sign with inward (usually male) palm This is often taken as an offensive gesture. It may indicate a form of mockery. It may also mean dissatisfaction or an expression of inferior quality. This is often perceived as an offensive hand gesture. This is often perceived as an insulting gesture, especially if directed at a person, like male to male, as it mimics masturbation. This gesture is obviously rude. It should not be used in a respectable setting. The hand gesture is also often used as a response to something perceived as poor quality, like a performance or a project. The reference is to masturbation being a poor sex substitute with a woman, and that men who masturbate are actually not “real men”. It is seen as an aggressive and offensive gesture. It is generally referred to as “flicking the Vs”. This hand gesture is widely used, albeit used incorrectly. The gesture was patterned from the 1415 Battle of Agincourt during the Hundred Years War. It was when the tactically pivotal Welsh longbow men supposedly mocked the beaten French soldiers and the treats to cut off the bowmen’s fingers. Chapter 5: Handshakes People with firm handshakes are often perceived to be confident. In business, a firm handshake is considered a good thing. However, uncomfortably firm handshakes are believed to connote a lack of respect or awareness (like if used in cultures) where firm handshakes are not considered normal. A Quick History The tradition of handshaking started in ancient times as a gesture of trust. It is done to show that each person does not carry a weapon. It is one of the most obvious ways to connect to another person. It is a sign of friendship. From the 1800s, a handshake was also made after closing a deal or sales. Handshaking in women became common much later when changes in social attitudes were seen and equality of women was recognized. Did you know that such physical contact in women was deemed improper? During those times, women had to be subservient to men, hence female curtsey was practiced. Non Verbal Signals Possible Meaning/s Handshake with the palm down Handshake with palm down Handshake with both hands A handshake that is equal and vertical A pumping handshake A weak handshake A firm handshake Often an indication of dominance. May mean submission or accommodating. Could be seen as seeking to convey honesty and trustworthiness. It is also seen as looking for an opportunity to control. It is perceived as non threatening. It is a relaxed gesture. It can connote enthusiasm. It can mean a lot of things. It connotes outward confidence. It is usually a firm handshake where the “upper hand” seems to impose or project a dominant impression. It is usually not a strong handshake where the lower hand is submitted to the upper hand dominance. How the gesture translate will depend on other significant factors aside from the handshake. This gesture, whether it’s sincere or not, is often perceived to be uncomfortably domineering. This is a common handshake between people who are neither seeking to control or to yield. This handshake may indicate the intense energy and enthusiasm of the person who initiated the handshake towards the other person. There is a perceived attempt to transfer energy and enthusiasm, literally. The gesture is popular with evangelists and counselors. Contrary to what others believe, a weak handshake does not indicate a weak personality. People who often do this are artists, musicians, or surgeons. They are perceived to be sensitive people. People who are strong and at the same time passive can have gentler handshakes. Older people may have weak handshakes, probably because of arthritis. This is actually a misleading hand signal. A firm handshake doesn’t necessarily connote a strong A handshake with clasped hand It may indicate seeking control or paternalism. person. It is a sign of outward confidence, which could actually mask deceit, or a weak bullying personality, or it can indicate a strong person. Keep this in mind, a strong handshake doesn’t necessarily mean a positive indicator of a good personality. This hand gesture is often misinterpreted. This handshake indicates a desire to control. It can also mean a feeling of wanting to care, which is often due to arrogance. For a lot of people, this is an invasion of personal space. Chapter 6: Arms Ni y The Importance of Arms in Body Language The arms serve as our defensive barriers when they are positioned across the body. On the other hand, it can connote feelings of openness and security when the arms are in open positions, particularly when it is combined with open palms. The arms are reliable in revealing the mood or feeling of another person, especially when interpreted along with other body language signals. Just to illustrate: Crossed arms = could be defensive Crossed arms + crossed legs = could be defensive Crossed arms + crossed legs + frowning + clenched fists = definitely indicates defensiveness and hostility Body language is more than learning about the theory, it is being constantly aware of the signals other people may be giving. Non Verbal Arm Signals Possible meanings Deas Crossed arms or folded arms | It is a sign of being defensive. | As many of us know, crossed It can also mean reluctance. arms is like a protective barrier. The reasons could be diverse, ranging from severe animosity or concern to boredom, or being too tired to be attentive and interested in anything. In the workplace, it can be manifested by subordinates who are feeling threatened by people of authority. Important note: Remember that people tend to cross their arms when they are cold. It is easy to misread this arm gesture. Crossed arms while fists are | A sign of hostility. It is also an | Clenched fists are often a clenched indication of being defensive. gesture to reinforce stubbornness or aggression. It can also mean a lack of empathy. A person gripping their own | It may indicate feelings of | When you grip your arms upper arms insecurity. while folded it is an effective self hugging gesture. It is an attempt to reassure another person that everything is fine. One arm positioned across | It can be an indication of | The arms form a protective the body clasping the other | nervousness. signal. It is also a self hugging arm by the side (female) gesture. Arms held behind the body | It is a sign of authority and | You will often see this among while the hands are clasped confidence. royalties, policemen, teachers, armed forces, etc. A handbag is held in front of | It can be a sign of nervousness. | This gesture is another one of the body (usually female) those protective barrier signals. Holding some paper across | This is also a sign of | This another protective barrier the chest (usually male) nervousness. gesture, especially when the arm is positioned across the chest. Constantly adjusting | Also connotes nervousness. This is another type of watchstrap, tie, cuff, etc., protective barrier signal. with the use of the arm Part of the arm or hands are | Another gesture which | This is another form of covering the genital (usually | connotes nervousness. protective barrier gesture. male) Holding a drink (or glass) in | Sign of nervousness. This is another kind of front of the body with both protective barrier signal. hands While seated, holding a drink | A sign of nervousness and | This is often seen with one arm on one side using the hand | anxiety. resting on the table, across the from the other side body, while holding a drink (or a pen). This is another type of protective barrier sign. Touching (scratching) the | This is another gesture that | Just like the others, this is a shoulder with the use of the | connotes nervousness. gesture forming a protective arm across the body barrier. Chapter 7: Legs and Feet Importance of Legs and Feet in Body Language The signs made with the legs and feet are quite difficult to control consciously or to even fake. The leg and feet can give clues to a person’s moods and feelings. What to consider when trying to decipher the body language of the leg and feet: e Take note that men and women seat differently. This is the first consideration when you are reading leg body language. This is maybe partly because of clothing and partly because of sexual differences. Men obviously exhibit more open leg positions compared to women. e More mature women tend to adopt more modest leg positions compared to younger women. This may be brought about by differences in upbringing, social trends, and types of clothing. Take these factors into consideration when trying to read and assess body language. e You should also consider that when people have been sitting for long periods, they tend to shift leg positions. This may lead to making false assumptions in terms of the signals other people are making. e Leg signals are often accompanied by hand and arm signals. For instance, you are likely to see someone with crossed legs and crossed arms. This may come off as having feelings of disinterest, insecurity, detachment, or rejection. It is important to take note that the terms “crossed legs” or “leg crossing”, when used alone, may refer to the legs crossed at both knees. The leg position known as “Figure 4” entails the supporting leg being crossed above the knee by the lower calf of the crossing leg. This creates a figure 4 shape, that’s how it got its name. It is also known as the American leg cross since it is more popular in the United States than in the UK. Non Verbal Legs and Feet Signals Chapter 8: Eyes The Importance of the Eyes in Body Language The eyes are probably the most important aspect of the non verbal signs people send to one another. Admit it or not, we tend to assume that we can all “read” other people’s eyes. Our heightened awareness of what we actually see in other people’s eyes are incredible. Making eye contact allows us to see if the other person’s eyes are focused on us or not. It is also easier for us to see a piercing look, a blank stare, a secret glance, or the moistening of the eye just before tears come. When looking for non verbal signals through eye contact, always look at the eyelids. It is also important to consider when the other person widens their eyes or close them, or when the pupils enlarge or contract. We will learn how to decipher non verbal signs involving the eyes in the next section. Non Verbal Eye Signals Chapter 9: Facial Expressions Facial Expressions / Facial Gestures We smile when we are happy, or we like what we see. We make a frown to express our frustration, disapproval, or unhappiness. Often, facial expressions may reveal one’s true feelings about a particular person, situation, or event. While you may say that you are okay, the look on your face may mean otherwise. Universal Facial Expressions Today, there are basic facial expressions of human emotions that are recognized around the world. The use and acknowledge of these facial expressions are genetically inherited instead of being socially conditioned or learned. These basic human emotions are used, recognized, and are part of humankind’s genetic character: Raising and lowering motions of 1. Happiness mouth corners (like a smile). Lowering of the corners of the 2. Sadness mouth, sometimes with the raised inner portion of the eyebrows (like a frown). The brows are arched. Eyes are 3. Surprise wide open, jaws slightly drop. Raised brows with eyes wide open 4, Fear and mouth slightly open. The upper lip is raised while the 5. Disgust nose bridge is slightly wrinkled. Both cheeks are raised. Brows are lowered. Eyes are 6. Anger bulging while lips are pressed firmly. Take note that four of the six universal emotions are negative. When you seem to doubt the other person’s words, the expression on their face will determine if you can trust or believe what they are saying. There is a study saying that the most trustworthy facial expression is slightly raising of the eyebrows and a slight grin. Researchers agree that this facial expression connotes confidence and friendliness. Facial expressions are among the universal forms of body language. People may not be able to understand each other’s language most of the time, but they can discover each other more by paying attention to each other’s facial expressions and gestures. Charles Darwin’s Theory Charles Darwin even published a book in 1872, title The Expressions of the Emotions in Man and Animals. It initially outsold The Origin of the Species . His statements about genetically inherited facial expressions became the subject of debates for many years. During the 1960s, Paul Ekman, a psychiatrist from California and considered an expert in facial expressions, conducted and published studies with people from different cultures to explore the validity of Charles Darwin’s theory. Ekman’s work included isolated tribes people who may not have been influenced by Western media and images, and essentially made a conclusion that Darwin was indeed right. Reading Facial Expressions Emotions are an important aspect of our lives. Our face is probably the most expressive part of our body. But there will be instances when these expressions will be quite subtle, and as a result, you can miss out on the signals if you are not paying attention. There are four aspects of facial language that you need to take into consideration and pay much attention to. One of these is referred to as face reading. Basically face reading unlocks the meaning of all the geographic features of your face and the psychological traits that come with it. The three other aspects are gestures, biological responses, eye movement, and behavior. Facial Gestures One’s facial gestures can reveal loads of information about their feelings, their thoughts, and what motivates them. To be able to read facial gestures more accurately, you should be on the lookout for the following: e Movements of the lips and tongue e Variations in the smiles and frowns e Movements of the eyes e Patterns of blinking of the eyes e Squinting in the eyes e Movements of the eyebrows e The direction of the person’s gaze while listening to another person speak e The direction of a person’s looks as you converse with them e Facial muscle movements e Wrinkling of the nose and the forehead Every facial gesture and signal will be able to help you unlock another’s person’s thoughts and feelings — which they don’t usually speak of or readily show others. You’ll need to pay close attention to the different patterns of these movements as you simultaneously identify what triggers them. Paleness versus Blushing While you observe another persons’ face, you should also pay close attention to the changing colors of their skin tone, including the intensity. There could be some things that you say or do that may (even in subtle ways) affect them at a deeper emotional level. Under these scenarios, the person may not be able to express how they are feeling via their body language or facial gestures, but you will see that in the changing color of their face. Ruling out any medical condition, generally, a person’s face pales (takes a lighter color) when they are afraid or shocked with what they’ve just seen or heard. On the other hand, you’ll notice a person’s face to blush (takes on a darker color) when experience an intense feeling of anger, embarrassment, or disagreement. It is important that you put all of these things into the context of the current situation or circumstance that other person might be in, then interpret accordingly. Pupil Constriction and Dilation In addition to observing facial gestures and the changes in the color of the face of another person, you’ll also have to be aware of the changes in their eyes, particularly the pupil. Dilated (or enlarged) pupils means that the person is calm and relaxed, open to ideas and suggestions, enjoying your company, or is madly in love with you. Conversely, constricted (or small) pupils may mean that they don’t trust you, or they don’t believe what you are saying, or they don’t agree with your ideas. It is important to note that the variations in pupil size are influenced by the lighting of the environment, plus the general state of health and state of mind of that person. So, do not immediately assume anything. Chapter 10: Body Language and Spoken Language b y One’s spoken language can actually reveal more information about a person than words alone. Having said that, it’s not just from their words alone that you can see through the person’s hidden agenda or thoughts, but actually from the meaning and the emotional content behind the words they use while they are talking to you. Watch out for some of the aspects of the spoken language of another person if you want to peer into their psychological make up. Words Used Pay close attention to certain words that they use while talking to you and others. These words may reveal some of the following facets of their personality: e Hidden agendas and interests e Degrees of exaggeration e Personal biases about certain topics e Facts or fictitious ideas and opinions e Assumptions and misunderstandings. When you’ve successfully caught up on these subtle signs, you’ll be better prepared to make adjustments with your conversation strategy in accordance with the other person’s thinking processes. Emotional Undertones A person’s real intentions and motivations can be strategically hidden behind their words, but not within the words themselves. Hence, you’ll have to be more observant of the emotional undertones of their words. You can identify these emotional undertones by observing the tone of their voice, their facial expressions, and the variations in the body language that they use while they are communicating with you. You’ll also have to be aware of the bigger global picture as to how it relates to the other person’s psychological makeup. By considering and reflecting on the bigger picture, you’ll be able to easily unlock the other person’s psychological “recipe”. The Silences “Used” Most of the time, it is not so much what another person says that reveal a whole world of insights and information about them, but rather the clues are hidden in the things that they don’t say and within their silences between their words. When you ask another person a direct question, pay close attention to their answer, while simultaneously making a mental note of what they did not explicitly mention. e How do you relate this to their hidden intentions and motives? e As they speak, focus on the other person’s body language and facial gestures when they pause in between words (or phrases). This may help you see the patterns of their way of thinking and their emotional state of mind. e What are they doing to their face and body during those pauses (moments of silence)? e Based on these silences, what could be their hidden intentions and motives (if any)? d a 4 h Bs W ` = > PE Oe See, A So far, we have talked about the different physical signals that we should be aware of in our quest to unlock another person’s hidden emotions, thoughts, and motives. Each of these signs varies and dependent on some important factors that should be considered before jumping to making assumptions about their psychological makeup. Cultural Background The words we speak, our gestures, physical behavior, and our actions may significantly be influenced by our cultural background and traditions. It’s the same for other people, hence, we should learn to interpret all non verbal signals in reference to other people’s traditions and behaviors that may be associated with their individual cultural heritage. We should have to study and be aware of other people’s cultural standards and norms and adjust our interpretations accordingly. Social Setting The social setting is also a huge factor that influences a person’s gestures, physical behavior, words, and actions. A lot of us are self conscious about how we behave in public. Most of us are too self conscious about what we say and do under certain social conditions. For example, there are words and gestures that you use at a party that would be considered inappropriate at a funeral. We are quite careful with our actions. We are like chameleons who quickly change in color (behavior) depending on the social setting we may find ourselves in. In this regard, it is imperative to read into another person’s emotions, thoughts, and motives in relation to the social setting. Environment The environment also has an effect on how a person acts and behaves. Sometimes, there is a specific kind of environment that helps a person feel calm and relaxed. Likewise, some environments may cause tension, stress, and anxiety. You have to take the surroundings you are currently in when you try to find meanings in another person’s words, thoughts, emotions, and motives. Demographics Another important factor to consider when trying to interpret a person’s words, gestures, actions, and behavior is the demographics. These may include the following: e Age e Gender e Religion e Employment status e Occupation e Marital status Each of the above variables may influence how another person’s physical signals are revealed in the “real world”. You will have to include demographics as one of the factors that can influence a person’s emotions, thoughts, and actions. Physical Health Another factor to consider is one’s physical health. A person may act differently when they are feeling sick. They may say things that they don’t normally say. They may react in ways that they don’t normally do when they are in tip top shape. Facial gestures, body movements, words, etc. may change because of health issues. This is the reason why you cannot make assumptions when trying to decipher another person’s actions. Person’s External Appearance The personal appearance of another person may be able to give you a wide array of information and insight about their emotions, thoughts, and patterns of behavior. For example, someone with good grooming habits who dresses well and smells good will naturally have a different set of qualities, habits, and personality traits compared to a person who appears to be scruffy, clad in dirty clothes, and smells of body odor. However, it is also easy to become judgmental — but you should still remember not to judge a book by its cover. Still, context and circumstances are two important considerations when trying to gather information about a person. This way, you’ll be able to piece together all the bits and pieces of information you have been getting to finally unlock what the subtle signals mean. . T Fie oe =. ; =e There are four important variables that should be considered that when you uncover will help give more information about another person, these are: e Beliefs e Values e Attitude e Strengths and Weaknesses Let’s discuss them one by one: Beliefs The beliefs of a person will determine what actions to take daily and what decisions to make consistently. In addition, these beliefs will determine what they will never be caught doing — given that these activities may be going against what they believe in. A significant aspect of one’s belief process can be unlocked within the context of their religion. Every religion in the world has its own set of rules and standards that they expect their followers to abide by. When followers break these rules, there will be moral consequences that may lead to unpleasant circumstances. Your initial objective is to know if the person you are communicating with has a set of religious beliefs. Once you know that they do, you will then have to determine how committed they are to abide by their religion’s set standards. Acquiring this information allows you to better predict the other person’s behavior, emotional patterns, and thoughts, which will then help you know how to make an impact on them. However, it is important to point out that religion is only a small aspect of a person’s belief process. Aside from religion, there may be other beliefs that may pertain to love, life itself, work, play, self expression, etc. Each of these beliefs will help us determine the decisions we need to make and the actions we have to take daily. The more thorough you are in identifying another person’s beliefs, the more insight you will get into reading their personality, thus allowing you to better predict how they will act in the future. It is easy to learn about another person’s belief patterns — it by directly asking open ended questions on their thoughts and opinions about certain situations. Carefully listen to their answers while observing their physical expressions. All of these signals will give you a clear insight into their belief systems. Values Each one of us has an unconscious ranking system that we give to our emotional experiences. Certain events will let us feel certain emotions that may lead us to either pleasure or pain. We will then interpret these events and rank them according to the most pleasurable to the least pleasurable. People may associate the highest feelings of pleasure in the following ranking (1 as the most pleasurable, 5 as the least pleasurable): 1. Hard work 2. Love 3. Health 4. Adventure 5. Security In reference to this list, the person puts great importance on hard work above all else. There is a slim chance that they will be willing to sacrifice their health and relationships to have more time for work. This ranking will also help give you a clearer insight into their decision making process. Influencing their behavior will be easier when you refer to the hierarchy of their values. Attitude Someone’s attitude is the manifestation of their own personality as it is influenced by the unpredictable circumstances of their surroundings. Pay close attention to how they will react to certain events and circumstances within their environment. You will have a glimpse of their attitude and a whole lot of other mysteries that are hidden in the deepest comers of their mind. Strengths and Weaknesses Every person has their own set of perceived and actual strengths and weaknesses. The first we know through our known personal biased perspectives, while the second depends on the field of ignorance. When you are interacting with another person, yov’ll have to determine and differentiate between the perceived and actual. When you are able to do that, this will allow you to unlock a wide array of personality characteristics that will be useful in influencing their way of thinking. Someone’s strengths and weaknesses are manifested through their own words, gestures, body language, and actions. It is important to remain vigilant. Once you’ve identified them, you will have to determine how you can use the information you’ve acquired to your advantage. Chapter 13: Breathing Patterns So far, we have learned many different ways on how to read body language. There are a lot of factors to consider when interpreting a person’s body language, like facial expressions, eye movements, legs and arms positioning, their smile, etc.. But probably you wouldn’t expect that a person’s breathing patterns also have meanings in body language. Our breathing and our emotions are connected. You get a glimpse of a person’s feelings through their breathing. When emotions change, there will also be changes in breathing patterns. Try figuring out the breathing patterns of your friend, your partner, or colleague the next time you have a conversation with them. Take note, though, that the breathing patterns alone will not be able to show how a person is feeling, but it’s affected by the circumstance that a person is currently in. Your breathing is likely to pick up when you are under a lot of stress, and this stress can either be turned into positive or negative. Slower breaths typically mean one is in a state of calmness. Let’s take a look at the different breathing patterns that you may have also experienced one way or another. Deep breaths may signify fear, excitement, anger, and love (attraction) In terms of interpreting another person’s body language, deep breathing is probably one of the most noticeable breathing patterns. When someone suddenly holds their breath when tangled in a difficult situation, they may be sending a message of fear. It could also mean anger when one takes a deep breath followed by shouting (or even screaming). Deep breathing also has other meanings, like a person is shocked, excited, or surprised. Deep breathing may also convey a positive feeling, like when one sees the object of their affection, you might notice some heavy breathing patterns. For instance, when a guy wants to impress a girl she likes, taking a deep breath would help make them appear to have a broader shoulder and a smaller stomach. Heavy and rapid breathing may mean fear and tiredness. If you see a person running because a dog was chasing them, yov’ll notice that they’ll be taking deep, rapid breaths. The same goes for someone you see chasing after a bus they just missed. This is because the heart beats a little faster, and as a result, the lungs would need more oxygen — that is very much referred to as “catching their breath”. A sigh could be a sign of sadness, hopelessness, or relief. A sigh is a long, deep breath with a faint sound. You might hear a person sigh because they felt relieved after a struggle — they are likely thankful that their struggle is over and that they have survived it. Sighing may also be an expression of hopelessness and sadness. Like when a woman is waiting for her date who failed to show up. It’s also an indication of disappointment and frustration. So, next time you are having a conversation with another person, look for signs in their breathing patterns, you’ll learn more about their thoughts, emotions, and motives through them. C hapter 14: Fidgeting oY eT ae + A) We cannot reiterate it enough that body language is crucial in communication. Your actuations may warp the whole meaning of what you are trying to convey. Having said that, our “bad” body language habits are quite hard to break. When you’ve been accustomed to slouching, folding your arms, or averting your eyes, you’d barely notice what you are doing. These bad habits become like “second skin”. For this chapter, we will discuss one of the most difficult body language habits to ditch — fidgeting. What is fidgeting or fidget? Other terms that can be used include squirming, dancing in the chair, and back and forth shifting. To fidget is to make small movements with your body, particularly with the hands and feet. Fidgeting means repetitive behaviors like swinging of the feet while in crossed leg position, tapping of the toes, shifting positions, or the drumming of the fingers. In other words, fidgeting is often associated with not paying attention. It connotes restlessness and discomfort. For instance, you have been sitting on your chair for a long time listening to a lecture, you’|l absentmindedly find yourself tapping your pen or playing with it. Fidgeting temporarily distracts you from whatever activity you are currently doing. Scientists and researchers often refer to fidgeting as a “mental break” because it becomes the body’s way of trying to stay focused on an activity. However, other studies suggest that fidgeting could mean a wandering mind. It is often seen as a negative signal. However, when the body starts fidgeting, it also starts to release energy that will help you calm down and soothe the nerves when you are under a lot of stress. Fidgeting is actually the body’s way of saying that it needs to do some exercise. Use this information to turn the negative connotation of fidgeting to positive. In adults, fidgeting is also seen as a sign that a person has a lot of excess energy, or it is also deemed as having hyperactivity disorder. Fidgeting can also be a sign of boredom and nervousness. When you are stressed, the body releases adrenaline, the stress hormone. As a result, the body will be given a signal by the brain to move so as to burn the excess energy off. Involuntarily, the movement has to be made to solve the issue of having excess energy, and the stress hormone adrenaline, plus cortisol (another stress related hormone) are instrumental for this “action”. Thus, it may be deemed normal to fidget when under a lot of stress. This explains why you’ll notice people seem to be squirming in their chairs because of stress or pressure. Fidgeting is also seen as a sign of boredom. The body receives internal cues to move, get up, and leave. Think of the body as a car revving its engine. Therefore, fidgeting serves as a substitute for walking or running in situations that neither can be done or the situation merits otherwise. Fidgeting is also considered as an expression signaling that the body needs exercise and movement so as to burn off energy. This is quite common in children who are not used to sitting still for long periods. It is commonly associated with children diagnosed with having hyperactivity disorder. However, it has been recently reported as just an overstatement. In recent years, children are being allowed to release excess energy in classroom settings. Teachers usually have activities for children, so they are not left sitting for most parts of their day in schools. This move has been proven to be quite effective. Fidgeting may include touching the face and other parts of the body, rocking back and forth, smoothing clothing, adjusting sitting position, shifting back and forth, standing up then sitting down again, checking pockets, pacing, etc. In terms of body language, fidgeting may give you a lot of clues as to how the other person is actually feeling, without revealing anything to you verbally. These may include arousal, energy displacement, boredom, escape movements, stressful body language, and nervous body language. When trying to read through another person when they are constantly fidgeting, you’ll have to make sure that you are within the premise of our assumption that the one who fidgets is usually bored, restless, or stressed. Chapter 15: Posture and Body Language Body language is also referred to as body movements or kinesics. Body language encompasses gestures, head and hand movements, whole body movements, and posture. Body movements may be used to put emphasis on your ideas, suggestions, or opinions. It also provides other people to take a peek at your attitudes and emotions. However, there is a high likelihood that your body movements do not align with what you are saying. A person who is adept with unlocking clues on the subtle discrepancies in behavior will be able to use them as a reference as to how to conclude what another person is thinking and feeling. Different categories of body movement e Emblems : Gestures may have the same meaning as the emblems. Examples of these are the “thumbs up” sign, the peace sign, or the sign when hitch hiking. However, not all emblems are recognized internally. There will be various interpretations of their emblems based on a community’s culture and tradition. e Illustrators: Illustrators are the gestures that come with the words people say. Illustrators create a verbal message. Their gestures include nodding the head when agreeing to something or the circular hand movement when trying to say, “over and over again”. e Regulators: Regulators are the gestures that provide feedback while conversing. Examples include short sounds like “uh uh”, or “mmm mmm” or head nods, these could be expressions of boredom. These regulators will allow the other person to adapt his speech to reflect on the level of interest of his audience. Without getting feedback, it would be hard to maintain a conversation. We go back again to what we keep on saying throughout the other chapters context. It is always important to use your better judgment. e Adaptors: The adaptors are non verbal behaviors. Examples include adjusting the glasses, scratching the head, or biting fingernails. Biting their fingernails may connote a psychological issue. A person would be having feelings of doubt and nervousness. Posture Now, let us focus on our posture — the way we stand and hold ourselves. For this section, we will discuss posture and body language from the general attitude it represents. Posture is a matter of habit, it is imperative that you pay attention and make the necessary adjustments. Bad posture leads to bad health and negative image problems. On the other hand, good habits lead to better health and good first impressions. To illustrate, someone who has hunched shoulders is seen as lazy, indecisive, and passive, compared to someone who holds himself straight with straight shoulders. Posture by itself is not as expressive as hand gestures or facial expressions, but it can still be used as a basis when trying to decipher a person’s body language. Straight Posture For a lot of people, keeping your back straight and shoulders arched is quite hard. But only a few people realize its benefits. Having a straight and relaxed posture is good for your health. For one, it helps in the blood circulation thus ensuring that your body is in functioning in optimal condition. Body language affects how you feel, hence, sitting or standing straight up is a good way to improve your mood. It also provides you with the energy you need. When you are interacting with other people and you have a straight posture, you are giving off an impression of a confident person, someone who knows how you handle himself well. You are getting a positive impression from other people. On the other hand, having poor posture has a negative effect on your self esteem. It also reflects a poor self image. A slouch may be a temporary state of feeling down or it can be a result of having bad habits over the years. People look at others who have poor posture as lazy or have no confidence. However, there is an important consideration when it comes to posture and body language — the elderly. Hunched back and slumped shoulders may very well be an indication of old age. Though this is because of old age, it could have been prevented or improved had the elderly practiced proper posture. Briefly, we will give you some tips on how to achieve good posture. So what does it mean to have the “correct posture”? Consider these: e The head should be held high in a neutral position. Your ears should be in line with the shoulder line. e Your shoulders should be resting down. e Your chest should be held open (but it shouldn’t be puffed up). When you breathe, it should come from the abdomen. e Both your feet should be firmly on the ground, and the full weight of your body should be evenly distributed between both your heels. e Make sure not to overextend the curve of your back. It should also not be tensed that you can barely move. Remember you’re not a wooden log so you don’t have to be too stiff. e Maintain a slight tension in your stomach and buttocks muscles to keep your composure. It could be difficult at first, but if you get the hang of it, it will become a habit — a good habit indeed. Takeaway If you practice good posture, you’ll leave a positive impression on other people. When trying to decode another person’s thoughts and feelings using posture, keep in mind that not all who slouch are lazy or have a bad posture, consider if they are in their golden years. Again, context and other factors influence the meaning of posture in relation to body language. Defensive Body Language A defensive stance may mean hostile attitude or insecurity. Hiding and Shielding Our body language evolves as we grow as it adapts to our social environment. We learn to express the same attitudes and emotions like we did as children, but this time, only with more subtlety and with self control. This is true specifically in societies where it is inappropriate to publicly express one’s feelings. The best example is defensive body language. When a little child feels insecure, you’ll often see them hiding behind their mother or behind a piece of furniture. This is their way of seeking protection and refuge. As the child grows, obviously, they won’t be able to hide behind their mother or hide behind a curtain because doing so may reveal their lack of confidence. This becomes a defensive stance by looking for other artificial barriers to help them feel safe and secured. Most Common Defensive Gesture Keep this in mind: the most common gesture for self comfort is folding your arms. It’s like hugging yourself so you’ ll feel protected. The chest is a vulnerable part of the body because it contains vital organs: the heart and lungs. This posture is aimed to protect yourself. When people fold arms, they feel that they take back the control and they feel protected, not because you are afraid of being physically assaulted. When you are reading the many aspects of the body language of another person, look for these varieties of folding the arms: e Folded arms with clenched fists e Arms are tightly or loosely folded e Arms are hidden or revealed e Both hands are clutching the arms e Hands are positioned under the armpits The above gestures connote defensiveness, but each of these stances is on a different scale or attitude. The more tense the gesture appears to be, the more severe the reaction. However, it can also mean that the person is cold. If both arms are held loosely, it can connote having a close minded attitude. It can also mean outright rejection. The person is sending a message that they are not impressed at all. When the arms are folded and the fists are clenched, it may connote a more hostile or aggressive stance than the commonly folded arms. It could be seen aS a warning prior to a physical assault. You would often see this kind of stance from security personnel. Are arms folding the same as the crossed leg stance? Another form of defensive body language may appear with the use of the legs. Legs crossed is a subtle way of hiding one’s insecurity. It is a less obvious position because most people are not focused on lower body gestures. Another defensive stance is crossing the ankles. Experts say it is equivalent to biting the lips, as it means that the person is holding something back or they are trying to hide something, a feeling, or an emotion. While crossing the legs is a result of old habits, it is not actually considered as a defensive attitude. For instance, early on, girls are taught to keep their legs together, because it is considered a more lady like position. Having mentioned that, if you see a girl sitting with her legs far apart, it is a display of a dominant personality or a display of a provocative demeanor. It’s like she is telling the people around her that she doesn’t care about what other people think. Fig Leaf Position A quite familiar posture is called the fig leaf position — both hands are crossed over the genital area. Experts say this position is a self comfort gesture. It is a sign of vulnerability since it appears that the person is protecting the most sensitive part of their body. A person in this position may be feeling uneasy or something or someone is making them uncomfortable. It may also be an indication that the person is an introvert. It can also mean that person has an innocent personality, someone who is not comfortable displaying their sexuality in public. This position is actually the opposite gesture that seems to be emphasizing the crotch area — like where the thumbs are protruding out of the pocket or belt towards the crotch as if showing “who’s the man”. Subtle Means of Making a Defensive Body Language For those who are more conscious of their body language, like public figures, celebrities, or politicians, they are aware that folding their arms in front of them may have a negative connotation. It may mean that they feel insecure or being defensive, which is not a good image to project. They cannot be caught making that stance in public. To protect the image they are trying to project, these people try to avoid obvious gestures that may be uncomfortable or inappropriate. However, people cannot fully control their own body language. This is true especially when one is under a lot of stress. For people who have a public image to protect, they would resort to more subtle ways of expressing their insecurity, like the following: When a public figure is under immense pressure or stressed out, they resort to more subtle ways of defensive body language: e “Playing” with their wristwatch or any accessories on their hand or arm. This is a self touch gesture. It is a gesture that shields the body and it provides an excuse for the person to do so. You will often see this stance when a person is put in a tight spot, like when they need to deliver a speech or make a presentation. e Holding a few items in front of the body, like a book, a folder, an umbrella, a bag, or a podium, among others. The item acts as the person’s protective shield. e Holding a drinking glass with both hands. Normally, we don’t hold our glass with our two hands. For some people, using both hands to hold their glass is their way of hiding inside their comfort zone. People can be defensive. Some people who use the posture of defensive language feel more comfortable doing it. They cannot admit that they doing the defensive stance because they feel threatened, and for most of them, this is nothing personal. It is important to take note that our body language is a reflection of our inner mood subconsciously, and not because it is our intention to display it. So, if we feel comfortable in folding our arms, something could be bothering us and we subconsciously “protect ourselves from it”. This is the reason why we feel relaxed and comfortable when we are in this position. It is important to point out that the interpretation of one’s body language is made by the receiver. Folding your arms may be comfortable with you but other people think otherwise. It’s the same when you are the receiver of such a gesture. What is the difference between simply being cold and being defensive? Most of us would normally fold our arms and legs in both cases. However, it’s actually easy to distinguish them — it’s in the amount of tension and discomfort displayed. e Both hands are stuck under the armpits, and not under the elbows. e Legs are straight and tensed, and not easily rested. e The head will be bowed down, hiding the neck. e Other signals, like chattering teeth, stomping feet, and shivering. Blocking Thoughts Experts agree that crossed body language means the person is being unreceptive to the other person. There were studies made proving that defensive body language creates a negative reception towards the speaker. It also blocks off information. The longer one stays in this position, the more negative and unreceptive one would become towards the speaker. Keep in mind that our body language not only reflects but also affects our mindset. Even if you are genuinely interested in what the speaker has to say, your defensive posture may lead to adopting a closed minded and isolated position. An open body is a prelude for an open mind. It actually works both ways. So, if you are the speaker and you want the other person to listen to you, change your stance, and adapt the open body position rather than the crossed body position. Remember that your goal is to have them listen to you and you’ll never achieve that if you have a defensive stance. You can also release the tension by letting your listeners give their doubts and objections. Ask if they have questions or concerns. Make them feel that you care about their thoughts. Defensive Body Language is Not Always Bad It is all not that bad. Defensive body language is a reflection of your feelings and it’s just natural that you want to express it. The next time you’re with a group of strangers, it’s natural not to feel secure. It’s normal that you wouldn’t want to let your guard down until you know them. Another point of consideration, people tend to “mirror” the body language of others and we all do it intuitively. Don’t be surprised to see a group of people conversing with each other with the same stance — arms folded. It can be a sign of mutual display of unity and not necessarily a brewing conflict. However, if your goal is to come off as more approachable, then you’ll have to ditch the defensive body language and adopt open body language. Positive Body Language After going over the negative body language postures, it’s now time to talk about the positives. How do we tell if it is positive body language? When we say positive body language, it means open and approachable. But it doesn’t mean that you’|l always have to use, rather, it should be a cluster of signals that exude an open minded and friendly attitude. How do you do it then? Let’s explore the possibilities. Avoid Creating Barriers To establish trust with other people, you’ll need to show them that you do not pose a threat to them, and you are not afraid of them either. Keep in mind that a defensive stance affects your attitude, hence, if you are constantly on the defensive, it will be hard for other people to approach you or for you to accept them. So, you need an open body language and you have to avoid creating barriers. The main purpose of removing your defenses is to create a warm, welcoming, and confident atmosphere. This way you are telling them a message — that you do not fear them, and they shouldn’t fear you. This is a process. Complete strangers won’t immediately become your biggest fans just because you decided to “open up”. But if you play it right, they might reconsider, or at least you’ll be able to understand their general attitude and perception towards you. Here are the steps to “open up”: It is understandable that complete strangers will be comfortable at assuming the crossed arms and legs position at the start. It is also expected that they will also be keeping a considerable distance from each other. Some people would hold something in front of them, like a bag or a file folder. Some will even close up their coat. As they warm up with one another, the legs barrier begin to disappear, and they will be a little “closer”. Then, they will start to loosen up a bit more as they continue with their interaction. Eventually, they will reveal their palms. Then comes the arms uncrossing (for both of them). This means they are warming up further. Soon enough, they will be leaning and pointing with the body towards the other person. It would be wise if you take the initiative and assume the next position because this might make them open up to you more quickly. We tend to copy the body language of the people around us, albeit unconsciously. So, it is highly likely that when you begin assuming welcoming positions, they might “mirror” your actions. How fast or how slow the process is will depend on the premise (if it’s a fun party or a random meeting of two strangers on the street), the character (whether introvert or extrovert), and the person’s culture. When you have nothing to hide: The first step in projecting a more positive body language is to avoid creating barriers. This will help eliminate the challenges in order to build a good long term relationship. But you have to keep this in mind, you cannot use this in your day to day life with everyone. Your superior might assume that you are planning to ask him for a longer leave or a friend might think that something’s up, hence the changes in you. You may use similar gestures so that you’ll come off as an honest, positive, and open person. You have to be conscious that your palms are exposed because this means your willingness and sincerity, that they can trust you, and that you have nothing to hide. Other signs may also project cooperation and honesty include: e Your head should be in a neutral position. Be mindful that you do not bow to them but never look down on them either. e Your clothes and body are open. Do not hold objects or items in front of you. e Smile Leaning Forward The most distinct way to non verbally say that you like a person, and you’d like to know him/her more is to lean forward. Does this mean you have to lean and nod more? Definitely not! Overdoing it may lead to two problems, which are: e Overextending might be interpreted differently, like invading the other person’s personal space. This can make the other person feel uncomfortable, even if it wasn’t your intention in the first place. This is also the reason why some people would lean forward when they are trying to intimidate their opponent, only this is deemed more aggressive and creates more tension. e When you smile, nod, and lean with all the people you encounter all the time, you will come off as someone who is eager to please. It has a negative effect since people will look at you as having a lower status in society. Don’t Overdo Being “Positive” Positive body language doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the “best” form of communication. People are social creatures. We have different emotions and attitudes, trying to apply only one all the time will give others the impression that you are fake, insincere, or one dimensional. Consider this, an over expressive positive and attentive attitude will actually hurt your status and reputation. If people see you doing it every single time that they see you, they will take it for granted and easily dismiss it. You don’t have to please everybody. You should show focus and attention, yes, but only to those who deserve it. Body Language: Dominance and Submissiveness For this section, let’s discuss how we express a dominant or a submissive attitude via our body language. When we say dominance or submissiveness, we are talking about the amount of influence over other people. e How strongly do you feel compared to the other members of the community or the group? e How comfortable are you to take command and be responsible for making decisions for the group? e Are you the alpha male (female)? Or are you simply a follower? e Are you at the bottom of the pack? All these signs are quite visible in the way you talk, act, and move. The hierarchy seems to be part of the society that is used to maintain order. Every time there is a new group setting, there is always a need to establish who are the ones who will lead and who will be the followers. There is no need to cast votes. No need to ask questions. It appears that everyone is simply able to find their place. How does it happen? Here are two factors that explain it: e Context and Position ; they often dictate who should be the dominant person in a specific scenario. To illustrate: a ranking general may be the most dominant figure when it comes to the battlefield, but back home he could be letting his wife take the lead in making decisions about their family. People automatically submit to the people whom, they believe, know what they are doing. e Non verbal communication. We may speak the words, but our actions also have meanings. This could be others’ perception of us. For instance, if a young trainee acts dominant when talking to their CEO, that trainee will be considered as an insolent person, this is because he is challenging the authority of the commander. Remember that we cannot always have control over the context, but we still continue on and choose how we will act. Body language is probably the best way to deliver that message you want to share, without the need to resort to shouting. The Dominant Body Language Assuming the dominant posture could be due to habit — if you are used to being in charge over others. It could also be our assumption that we are at the top of the food chain. Alternatively, we recognize people of higher authority than us and those who wiser than us, and we submit to them. How to know who is the potential leader even from a distance? Here’s how: e Focus on group dynamics. Identify who leans towards whom. Who makes eye contact with whom? Often, most of the members are likely to lean or turn their body towards the person they perceive as the leader, this could be to seek that person’s attention and approval. e The behavior of the person you think can be or is a leader. Someone dominant is comfortable in his position — in control and makes important decisions. He doesn’t have to be aggressive or loud, nor does he need to be the center of attention. You’ll see that from his body language, the tone of his voice, and the way he deals and interacts with other people. Generally speaking, a dominant person will take advantage of body language to be able to take over a large space and to appear bigger and taller. Everything should depend on how you use body language to appear dominant. Here are a few examples: e Standing tall with your chest open and your head held high. e Taking space by spreading your arms as your legs are spread wide apart. e Revealing your vulnerable areas. As if saying, “I dare you to hit me,” it brings fearlessness. e Leaning back with your hands behind your back, which is often referred to as the “know it all” posture. e Hands on the hips . It’s imitating a fluffed rooster that is trying to appear bigger and intimidating. e Hands are tucked in the pockets or belt while the thumbs are pointing towards the crotch area. It’s a stance that seems to be showing off who has the “biggest tool” in the group. The males are often seen assuming this stance, but here are assertive females that you may see copying this dominant posture. e Hand in hand behind the back. It’s a common stance by a policeman who is patrolling the streets. It is a self assured posture. It is all about exposing your vulnerable parts and getting a lot of personal space. You'll see some women taking similar postures, but they appear to be subtler, more feminine. Like keeping just one hand on the hips, lifting her head high, and walking fast with long strides. Submissive Body Language The submissive body language takes on a more defensive, indecisive, or reclusive attitude. A submissive person opts to relinquish their power to other people and avoid being in control. They would try to appear as small as possible. Some people become submissive for a lot of reasons, including, the fear of being in command, low self esteem, insecurity, idolizing the other person, or unmotivated. Here are examples of submissive posture: e The Head is slightly bowed e The body will try to appear to be smaller and less intimidating e Chest caved in e Eyes are wide open and look innocent e Hunched shoulders appear to be passive and sad e Crossed and defensive stance. Chapter 16: Torso and Body Language The word “torso” came from the Latin word, thyrsus, which means “stalk”. The torso is the trunk of the body. This is the area where your vital organs are located. Being flexible, the torso can turn, twist, and bend back and forth. This is the area of the body that people have less conscious control over. The lack of conscious control of the torso makes it a good indicator of body language signs. So, if a person turns their torso away from you, it could be an unconscious way of signifying that they want to leave. Turn the torso away may also be an indication of feeling threatened and it is their way of protecting their vital organs. It can also be a sign that the other person doesn’t like you or that they don’t want to interact with you. In a business scenario, people could be turning their bodies away from you for many different reasons. It could be a feeling of insecurity. It may also mean they are being defensive. It can also mean they are in a hurry to get away from you, not because they feel threatened, but rather because they are hiding something. Whatever their reasons are, turning away the torso is a sign that they are feeling uncomfortable or they simply don’t want to engage. Chapter 17: Personal Space and Body Language ( v i . All of us have an invisible, protective bubble surrounding the body. It is like a force field that is immediately activated whenever we feel threatened. It is like a portable air bubble that we carry anywhere we go. Its size depends on the population in a particular place. Personal space is partially culturally determined. In some cultures, like in Japan, their residents are used to crowing and some would prefer the “open spaces, and they would feel more comfortable if you keep your distance. Zone Distances e Intimate Zone is between 6 and 18 inches (15cm to 45cm). Only our parents, partners, children, relatives, close friends, and even pets are to be this close to us. e Personal Zone is between 18 and 48 inches (45cm to 1.2m). This is the distance that we try to protect when we are around a lot of people, like social functions, parties, or an office full of people. e Social Zone is between 4 and 12 feet (or 1.22 3.6m). This is a safe distance when there are other people around you. e Public Zone is more than 12 feet (or 3.6m). Applications of Zone Distances People breach our intimate zone because of two reasons: first, they are a friend or relative or the other person is making sexual advances; second, the other person could be hostile and about to make an attack. Another person breaching our intimate zone makes us uncomfortable. It causes a faster heartbeat and adrenalin is released. The body starts to get ready in case a fight or flight response is needed. So, if you put your arm (with no intention of violating or disrespecting) around a person that has just been introduced to you, may have a negative effect. They may get offended but try to smile through the discomfort. The general rule is to keep your distance. The distance between two people reveals clues of what their relationship is. Lovers can comfortably press their torsos against each other. This is different when you are in close proximity with a relative, friend, or stranger. An exception to this rule may happen when the social standing of a person is considered. To illustrate, the company’s CEO could be spending time off over the weekend with their buddy (who is also his subordinate), where they can move within each other’s intimate and personal zone. However, they maintain a safe distance when they are in the office (an unwritten code in the strata rules). Why People May Hate Riding in Trains and Buses Here are some of the unwritten codes that most cultures follow when people are forced into a place with a lot of people, like a packed bus, a big party, or standing in line at the grocery. e No talking to anyone, even with people you know. e Refrain from making eye contact with other people. e Keep that “poker face”. e Reading a newspaper or a book and pretending to be so engrossed with what they are reading. e Nobody movement is allowed in bigger crowds. e You watch the changes in the floor counters at all times. This is referred to as “masking” and it is common everywhere. This is a person’s attempt of hiding their emotions from other people by wearing a neutral mask. We usually hear some people refer to their commute as “unhappy” or “miserable”. These could because of the expressionless looks on the faces of a lot of travelers. These are actually misjudgments by observers. Spacing Rituals There is an unwritten rule when a person is caught in a sea of strangers. For instance, when one goes to the cinema, they will automatically look for a seat that is halfway between the end of a particular row and where the nearest person is seated. At a health club, a person would choose the hole with the biggest available space. Cultural Factors that Affect Zone Distances It is important to consider the cultural differences of people around the world. What is acceptable to the Americans could be unacceptable to Asians. So it is imperative that when you are around people of different cultures, you have to think twice about your actions. Chapter 18: The Most Common Gestures You ill See Daily s$ Pid i foy s This section will cover some of the most common gestures that you may see in your daily interactions with other people. Head Nod The head nod is one of the most commonly used and generally it means a “yes” or an agreement. It is a stunted version of a bow. Bowing is known as a submissive gesture, so the head nod signifies that you agree with the other person’s idea or point of view. The head nod has a different version in India. They rock their head from side to side, which is referred to as the head wobble, to say “yes”. For Westerners and Europeans, it may mean “maybe yes, maybe no”. On the other hand, in Japan, the head nod doesn’t mean “yes, I agree”, but usually it signifies “yes, I hear you”. In the Arab countries, locals use a single, upward movement of the head to mean “no”. Bulgarians use their “no” gesture to mean “yes”. Persuasion Tool Experts say that the head nod is a powerful persuasion tool. Studies reveal that a person will talk 3 to 4 times than usual when their listener nods their head. Slow nodding may mean that the listener is interested in what the speaker is saying. However, a faster version may be telling the speaker to finish up because the listener has become uninterested. Head Shake When someone shakes their head, it usually means dissenting or a “no”. When you are talking to someone, be mindful of their head gestures. They could be saying that they agree with your ideas yet making head shaking movements (which has a negative connotation), you should be skeptical about it. Basic Head Positions e Head up — is the neutral head position. The head remains still with a few occasional nods. When the head is lifted high with the chin pointing forward, it may mean arrogance, fearlessness, or superiority. e Head tilt — is a sign of submission. It makes the person appear smaller and less intimidating. e Head down — is a negative sign. It indicates an aggressive attitude. It connotes disapproval or dejection. Head Shrug When someone hears a loud noise behind them, they would usually raise their shoulders and pull their head down between the shoulders, that is the basic head shrug. When it use in a business or personal context, it could mean a submissive apology. When you need to walk past other people who are talking, you may pull out ahead and duck — head down with the shoulders tucked in to appear inconspicuous. Hands on Hips Gesture People do the hands on hips gesture to appear bigger in physical appearance. With the elbows up and pointed out, it may indicate the eagerness to dominate. It is also called the readiness gesture. It simply means the person is ready to take on an assertive action. The hands on hips gesture helps make you appear bigger and more noticeable. Cowboy Stance The cowboy stance is when the thumbs are tucked into the belt or into the opening of the pockets. It frames the crotch area. It is perceived to show a sexually aggressive attitude, usually from men. It is the most common stance in a lot of Western themed shows. A man doing this gesture may be giving a message, saying that “I can dominate”. Legs Spread Position You would usually see this gesture in men, often signifies dominance. There are women who feel intimidated when they see a man using the legs spread position in business transactions. Leg Over the Armchair You’ll often see this in men who frequently use the leg spread position. The man appears to be claiming ownership of the chair. it is also a sign that the person has an aggressive, informal attitude. It connotes a lack of concern for others, indifference, and informality. It can be an annoying position particularly when one is in a business transaction or meeting. Straddling a Chair The person who does this wants to control and dominate while protecting their front. They use the back of the chair as a “shield” to protect their body. This could lead to a person becoming more aggressive. Catapult The catapult is the seated variation of the hands on hips position, except that the hands are behind the head while the elbows are pointed out. This is associated with the males, and they use it to intimate other people. It may also mean they calm and relaxed. The “Starter” Position The classic position indicating readiness for action is when the person is leading forward, appearing to stand up, with one or both of their hands are resting on the knees. A variation is where the person is leaning forward with their hands gripping the armchair, like the race is about to start. Chapter 19: Meaning Behind Personal Accessories and Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses, and Make up — For this chapter, we will learn more about the secret signals behind regular items and habits we may have and use every day. Smoking According to experts, smoking is actually an outward call that is an expression of conflict or inner turmoil. It is more than an addiction, but rather about reassurance. People use smoking to release tension and stress. The non smokers release their tension through: e Gum chewing e Self grooming e Foot tapping e Nail biting There are two types of smokers: 1. Addicted smokers 2. Social smokers Experts say that longer puffs are used as a sedative and addicted smokers rely on the cigarette’s sedative effect. They usually smoke all by themselves. On the other hand, smaller and quicker puffs are said to help stimulate the brain to produce a higher level of awareness. These are the ones who smoke only in social gatherings or when they drink wine. When one is socially smoking, they actually smoke just 20% of the time, and the other 80% is all about body gestures. There are studies revealing that smokers feel “normal” when they smoke, so to feel “normal” they should always be smoking. Smoking is a venue for non verbal messages to be sent out. These signals that smokers usually make are often about how they feel about something. Their common rituals include waiving, flicking, tapping, twisting, and other small gestures. Women Who Smoke You might often see this posture wherein a woman is holding their cigarette high while their wrist is bent back as if posing for a social display. The front of their body is left vulnerable. Smoking draws attention to their lips. It also allows opening the wrists. Smoking is deemed unhealthy, and experts say that women who smoke are easily persuaded to do things. There are studies saying that women who smoke are twice as Many as men. Men Who Smoke For the men, they keep the hand over or below the chest level. This is how they protect their body. Their wrist is usually closed. They often use the “pinch hold”, which is said to be a more secretive hold. Men who smoke are perceived to be masculine and seductive. They use cigarettes and smoking to connote secrecy. Both men and women have the same number of puffs, however, men hold smoke in the lungs longer, putting them at high risk of contracting lung cancer. When a smoker is feeling confident, superior, or positive, they would usually blow out the smoke upward. On the other hand, if one is feeling secretive, suspicious, or negative will blow the smoke downward. Speed is also a consideration. The faster the smoke is blow in the upward direction, the more superior the smoker feels. The faster the smoke is blown downward, the more negative. Smokers are also known to take longer when they are making a decision or during stressful situations. They smoke to stall time. Cigar Smokers Cigar smokers are regarded to have a high status in society — as the cost and size of cigars connote superiority. Glasses Every accessory a person uses is an opportunity to look for gestures to get information about them, glasses are no exception. A lot of people perceive that those who wear glasses are smarter and more intelligent. But this first impression may last for only 5 minutes until you’ve spoken with them. Designer frames with different designs, plus colored frames often reduce the appearance of intelligence in people wearing glasses. There are people who say that those who wear glasses appear to be more authoritative, studious, educated, and intelligent. People look at glasses in the business perspective as a statement of power and maturity. However, there are those who prefer to wear frameless or smaller glasses, and they are perceived as powerless and weak. You may often see a person holding their glasses — one arm of the frame is in the mouth. Often, people who do this are stalling time. A person usually does this towards the end of a negotiation. When one peer over the glasses, it is perceived that the person doing it is judging the other person. It is more convenient to do this than remove the glasses, especially for those who are trying to scrutinize another person. People who wear very dark glasses on their heads to meetings come off as relaxed and youthful. Makeup When a woman in the business world is wearing makeup, it adds to their credibility. This is also good to make them presentable to clients. Women who wear makeup (coupled with glasses) are perceived to be intelligent, sophisticated, confident, and outgoing. Those without makeup and glasses are seen as having a good appearance but low on skills. The Lipstick There is a study about how wearing lipstick makes a difference. Results show that women who wear lipstick are perceived to be interested only in themselves and the attention of their male colleagues. The women who wear muted color variations are seen as businesslike and career oriented. Those who do not wear lipstick are seen as the more serious type. So, if you are a woman and you are going on a date, you should wear bright red lipstick. If you are going to the office or meeting with business people, you should keep it simple with understated color. Part 2: How to Use Body Language to Your Advantage You’ve learned what body language is all about and the different ways to read them. Now, it’s time to know how you can use this knowledge to your advantage. Chapter 20: Examples of Positive and Negative Body Language Body language can either connote a positive or negative behavior. We have grouped some of the most common body language postures and listed them here. Positive Body Language Your movements and your gestures are considered positive when you come off as open, approachable, engaged, and interested. e Head is tilted towards one side This generally means that the person is interested or listening closely to what is being said. e Briskly rubbing hands together The person is communicating that they are excited about something. It may also mean that they are waiting in anticipation. But this can also mean that the person is feeling cold, so it is important to consider the setting. e Open palms, facing forward When the palms are open, it is a sign of honesty and openness. It can also be a sign of submission. It can also be an indication of sincerity and innocence. In churches, worshipers are often seen with open palms, a sign of respect and submission to their god. e Upright posture, shoulders arched back This is an indication that the person has self confidence. People in this posture are often seen walking briskly. It may be an upright posture, but you still have to feel relaxed and tall, not too rigid. e Hand stroking the chin (or beard) This is an indication that the person is in deep thought. Often, the motion is unintentional, especially when one needs to make a decision on something important. It is also an indication of interest and thoughtfulness. e Leaning closer When you are interested in someone or you like them, the tendency is to lean your body in their direction. This motion is also an indication that you trust the other person. However, it is important to consider the other person’s personal space so that you don’t overdo the leaning. e Making direct eye contact When looking at the other person in the eye, it means that you trust that person. It is also an indication of your confidence. But unwavering direct eye contact can sometimes come off as creepy or plain scary. Do not stare. e Head nodding When you constantly nod your head, it is an indication that you are intently listening to what the other person is saying. It also means that you agree with what is being said. It is also a way to acknowledge that the other person has some valid points. When you smile while you nod your head makes the movement more positive. e Handshake A firm handshake is an indication of self confidence and respect for the other person. Reaching out for a handshake means that you are interested. Negative Body Language It is sometimes referred to as defensive body language. Movements and gestures make you appear insecure, wunapproachable, closed off, disinterested, or hostile. e Both arms crossed over the chest This is a classic motion of being defensive. It could also mean that the person does not agree with what is being said or done by the other person. e Nail biting When a person has a habit of biting their nails, it is indicative that they are feeling nervous, insecure, or stressed out. This is often an unconscious motion. e Hand on the cheek The person is also in deep thought or thinking of doing something. Often, the hand on cheek posture comes with a furrowed brow, which is a connotation that the person is in deep concentration. Someone who is already lost in their thoughts is not paying attention to what is being presented to them. e Drumming the fingers (or finger tapping) This may mean that the person is becoming impatient and an indication that the person is already bored. e Touching the nose This could have several meanings. It could connote disbelief or rejection. It can also mean that they are being untruthful. e Steeping the fingers When you see someone whose fingertips are placed opposite each other. It is a sign of control and authority. This is often used by superiors like managers. e Head held in the hands It can be an indication of boredom. It could also mean that the person is ashamed or upset, though they won’t want it to show on their face. e Locked ankles When one does this, whether standing or seated, it connotes apprehension and nervousness. e Ear pulling When you see a person pulling one of their earlobes, it could mean that they are trying to make a decision, but they are still unsure. It also indicates one’s inability to arrive at a conclusion. e Fig leaf position A person whose hands are crossed in front of their crotch area while standing is an indication that they are feeling uneasy. It can also mean that the person is an introvert. It is named such because the position of the hand resembles the look of a man in the Bible, wearing only fig leaf on the genitals. e Fidgeting Fidgeting is a sign that the person is insecure or nervous. They could be playing with their ring, bracelet, or watch as a way of shielding their body. It can also be an indication that the person is bored. e Sitting at the edge of the seat This could be an indication the person is mentally or physically on edge. Chapter 21: Mirroring and Matching — How We Build Rapport Ai. A Ever notice when you and your best friends are together, and you tend to act and sound alike? It could mean that you have been friends for a long time. There is actually a mechanism behind it. Copying another person’s body language and mannerisms is often referred by Behavioral researches as mirroring and matching. You can use mirroring and matching to build rapport and create relationships. People tend to be more comfortable around people they know. Mirroring is a simultaneous “copying” of the behavior and actions of another person. It is like a person who is creating mirror images of the other person’s actions and behaviors. When mirroring is done with utmost respect and discretion, it creates positive feelings. Matching happens when there is a built in “time lag”. To illustrate, if the seated person uncrosses their legs and leans inward as they speak, you’ll have to wait a few seconds before you can discretely adopt the same position. One of the most effective ways to quickly build rapport is to mirror and match the most unconscious aspects of another person’s behavior during a conversation. Matching External Cues Posture — Our body language reflects our feelings and attitudes, mirroring, and matching another person’s posture allows you to understand more about them. If the other person places their hands on the table, you wait for about 4 to 5 seconds before putting your hands on the table. The same applies when they shift to another position or when they cross their legs, etc. Be mindful. Gestures — To effectively mirror and match the other person’s gestures, observe each in context. Do they tilt their head, or do they nod? Do they position their hands in a particular way? The key is to discreetly mirror their gestures. Facial expressions — There are a lot of possible expressions, so you have to be observant. Are their brows raised? Are they in a frown? Language and Vocal Patterns Inflection/Tone — Make subtle adjustments to your normal voice to match the other person’s. But your “mirrored” should not completely deviate from your own. Never copy tonality outright. It’s distracting for a man with a deep voice to match a woman with a high pitched tone. You get the picture? Speech Rate — Matching the other person’s pace will create alignment, allowing you to match their energy level. But, as always, it has to come out naturally and subtly. Sensory Predicates Most of us tend to favor one of four sensory based systems that would help us understand our world — the word we choose describe our world and our experiences. The four systems are: auditory, auditory digital, visual, and kinesthetic/feeling. Auditory Predicates — May include phrases and terms like tell, listen, hear, sound, resonate, loud and clear, give me your ear, etc. Auditory Digital Predicates — Includes think, learn, know, process, consider, decides, experience, understand, motivate, make sense of, word for word, pay attention to, etc. Visual Predicates — These include phrases like look, see, view, clear, foggy, bright, focused, reveal, paint a picture, etc. Kinesthetic/Feeling Predicates — Include touch, grasp, feel, hard, concrete, fuzzy, sharp as a tack, unfeeling, get in touch, hand in hand, etc. When you speak the same language, it would be easier to build trust and then establish rapport. Matching the other person’s energy level helps create rapport. A good way to match the other person’s energy level is to mirror their breathing rate. It could be difficult but it’s effective. Just remember to mimic and not to resort to gimmicks. Chapter 22: Body Language for Your Interview First impressions last that is why when you are going to a job interview, you have to make sure that you make a good first impression. For this chapter, we will discuss some tips on how you can make a great impression. Keep in mind that no matter how good your credentials are, still, the interviewer would have made an initial assessment during the first four minutes. You have to make a good impact the moment you walk in and non verbal presentation is important. At the Reception Area If possible, leave your coat with the receptionist. Never walk into an office with your arms full. Always stand at the reception area, do not sit. Most receptionists will ask you to take your seat to get you out of their sight. Make sure you stand and slowly rock back and forth on your feet. Look confident and in control. This is an indication that you are still waiting. When Entering the Office As soon as the receptionist tells you to enter, do so without hesitation. Never stand in the doorway because this indicates that you are in doubt or lacking in confidence. The Approach Even if the interviewer is doing something, directly walk in. Be confident. Put down the laptop or briefcase, or whatever you have in your hands, then shake the other person’s hand, and take a seat. Make the impression that you walking into offices is not new to you. Maintain your confidence and make it appear that you don’t expect to be kept waiting. Handshake Return the pressure that you receive. Let the interview decide when the handshake would end. If circumstance allows it, walk to the left of a rectangular table as you approach. This will increase the odds of a handshake between right handed individuals who are equals. If you can, avoid handshakes directly across the office desk. It is wise to use a person’s name two times during the first 15 seconds. When You Take Your Seat If you are to sit on a low chair directly facing the interviewer, turn away about 45 degrees from the interviewer to avoid assuming the “reprimand position”. If you cannot angle the chair, adjust your body instead. Office Seating If you were asked to sit in an informal area, like an informal meeting table, take this as a positive sign since a lot of business rejections are given from behind a desk. Do not sit on a low sofa where you will sink so low because it will make you look physically inconsequential. If there are no other available seats, just sit upright on the edge of the sofa so you still have control over your body language and gestures. Angle your body 45 degrees from the interviewer. Be Mindful of Your Gestures When you are calm, you have control over your movements. Take note that high status people use fewer gestures compared to low status people. Mirror the interviewer’s gestures and expressions when possible. Personal Distance Respect the interviewer’s space, especially during the opening minutes. If you move too close at once, the other person might respond by leaning away from you. Your Exit If there are things to pack, pack them calmly and deliberately, never rush it, then turn and walk out. If the door to the office was closed when you came in, close it behind you when you leave. People tend to watch you from behind as you walk away, if you’re a man, the back of your shoes should be clean. If you are a woman, point your foot towards the door and adjust the back of your clothes and your hair — this allows you to have an excellent rear view impression as you leave. As you get to the door, turn around and smile a little. It’s a better image to leave than your rear end. : Body Language for Seduction pr el N $ i } reo oy f mer t AT OES atp = e> w d k B k "e n a ) P =I. LT i You cannot flirt without using body language. To be successful in the game of flirtation, the body should speak what your mouth cannot express. Flirtation involves various sequences of gestures and expressions, some are obvious, and some are nuance, but most are done subconsciously. Women would usually take the lead here, and it’s up to the men to decode the signals. The woman should respond to the signs that the man sends back, giving the man the green light to take it to the next level. For the man to succeed in this game of flirtation he should be able to read the signals she sends correctly. Getting Their Attention There is a 5 step sequence in courtship: Eye Contact — She searches around the room and spots a man she likes. She waits until the man notices her and when he does, she will hold his gaze for about 5 seconds before turning away. The man now keeps a watch waiting if she will do it again. She will have to deliver this gaze for three times (on average) before the man realizes what is happening. This is the start of the process. 18. Smiling — The woman delivers one or more fleeting smiles — this is just a quick half smile aimed at the man which means he can come over. However, a lot of men won’t respond to these signals, leaving her to thinking that he is not interested. 19. Preening — The woman sits up straight so as to emphasize her breasts and she crosses her legs (or ankles). If she’s standing, she tilts her hips, as she titles her head to the side towards one shoulder, thereby exposing her bare neck. She will then play with her hair for about 6 seconds. She may also lick her lips as she flicks her hair. The man will respond by standing up straight, expanding his chest, pulling his stomach, adjusting his clothing, tucking his thumbs into his belt, and touching his air. Both the man and the woman would their entire bodies towards each other. 20. Talk — He goes to her and attempts to strike up a conversation. He’ll begin with clichés like, “You look familiar, I believe I’ve seen you before” , and other worn outlines to introduce one’s self. 21. Touch — The woman will be on the lookout for the opportunity to initiate a light “accidental” touch on the arm. A touch on the hand brings intimacy to a higher level. Every level of touch is repeated to see if that person is receptive and to let them know that the first touch wasn’t actually accidental. She would lightly touch hisshoulder to give the impression that she cares about him. These five steps are critical when trying to start a new relationship. Common Signals Women Use for Seduction Men, take note of the following: e Hair flip A woman unconsciously tosses her head back or runs her fingers through her hair upon seeing the man she is attracted to. It exposes the woman’s soft underarm, which men consider to be irresistible, plus pheromone or sex perfume is released. Wet lips — A woman’s lips are considered to be sexy by most men. It also symbolizes her genital area. Experts say that when women are sexually aroused, their lips, breasts, and genital become larger and redder. Touching herself Women are more sensitive to the touch than men (who are more visual). When she leisurely stroke her neck, throat, or thigh, she is sending a message that if the man plays his cards right she might let him touch her the same way. Limp wrist — A bent wrist while walking or sitting is a submission signal used by women and gay men. Men are easily attracted because they can be the dominant partner. Playing with a cylindrical object — It could be a cigarette, the stem of a wine glass, a finger, or anything that is phallic shaped. The man may respond by fondling her car keys or her cigarette lighter, or anything personal that she owns as if saying that he wants to have her. Exposed wrists — A woman’s wrists, particularly the undersides are considered the most erotic places on her body as its skin is extremely delicate. She usually exposes her palms to the man while she’s talking. A woman who smokes usually holds her cigarette palm up right beside her shoulder, exposing her wrists. The sideways glance over a raised shoulder — A woman’s bare shoulder is said to mimic her breasts. She holds the man’s gaze with dreamy eyes long enough for the man to take notice, then she looks away. It creates anticipation and excitement on the part of the man. The head tilt — A head that is tilted to the side gives her a helpless yet appealing look. She is exposing her neck, which is a vulnerable part of her body. The head dip — This pose makes the woman’s eyes look bigger and herself appear smaller, she appears vulnerable and waiting for his protection. It’s a sign of submission. Rolling the hips — Nothing is sexier than a woman strutting her wide hips. Tilted pelvic — She is highlighting her figure when a woman does this pose. Placing her purse close by — Her handbag is a woman’s personal domain. When she is with a man she is attracted to, she may purposely stroke her bag, teasing the man. The knee point — A woman who sits with one leg tucked under the other and points to the man is sending a signal that she is attracted to him. Dangling her shoe — If she is on her seat and you see her dangling a shoe off her foot, she is sending a message to the man that she feels comfortable with him. Entwined legs — Men find a woman sitting with entwined legs as sexy and appealing. How About the Men? Men usually display their wealth, power, and status. Compared to women, men don’t have much of courtship signals and gestures. But let’s try to look at some of the signals men make. Their most direct sexual display towards a woman is the thumbs in belt gesture which highlights their crotch area. When seated, he may spread his legs wide. Women are triggered visually by certain aspects of a man’s body. Here is a list of the physical characteristics of the male body that may have an impact on women. Takeaway Muscular arms, chest, and broad shoulders — Most women are attracted to a well defined upper body, but they are not too keen on the bodybuilder look. Small, tight butt — For women, it’s sexy and it indicates strong forward thrusting motion during sex. Narrow hips and muscular legs — Men’s legs are considered symbols of power and endurance. The key to decoding body language signals is mindful observation. It never fails. Chapter 24: Body Language Techniques for Public Speaking Many people are afraid of public speaking. There are aspects of public speaking that you need to learn. If nerves easily get to you when you need to speak in public, we have listed a few tips to make you feel comfortable speaking in front of a huge crowd. Aside from preparing your presentation and talking points, here are body language techniques that you can use next time you need to speak in public. Posture e Stand upright with your shoulders back. e Place your hands in your pocket and never cross your arms. e Face your audience as much as you can possibly can. Keep your body open. Breathing e Your breathing should be relaxed. Take deep breaths to ensure that your voice has power. e Pace your speech with slow, measured breathing. Pause when you need to emphasize important points. Gestures e Emphasize words with hand gestures. e Your audience will get bored with one dimensional movements. Keep their attention by alternating gestures, incorporating your hands, your arms, and your head. e When you have visual aids, point and look at the relevant data. Your audience will follow your hands and eyes automatically. e Use positive gestures. Eye Contact e Make eye contact with your audience — move from face to face. This will keep them engaged. e When you are entertaining questions, maintain eye contact to connote credibility and sincerity. Movement e Move around the space to make your presentation more dynamic. e Use movements to illustrate transitions from one key point to another. e A step towards your audience, this will create a positive reaction from them. Use this technique if you want to persuade or encourage the audience. Facial Expression e Smile to make the audience feel at ease with you. Exude confidence at all times and use the above body language to capture your audience. Chapter 25: Effective Body Language echniques and Tips for Teachers and the Classroom yi aSSwWwọỌ rk i C] A=lem L e l =a ra If you are a teacher and you want to be the one to control the classroom, you should learn some body language techniques and this chapter have just that. Here some effective techniques you can use: Non verbal Tricks e Welcome Your Pupils At the start of the day, be at the door to welcome them as they arrive. This will help calm them down because they will have to slow down and go inside individually. Once everyone is inside, confidently enter the room and greet them with a loud and clear voice. e Show Your Hands The hands are our trust indicators, meaning other people will trust us if they can see our hands. Keep your hands visible while you are in front of your class. Do not put them in your pockets nor place them behind your back or under your desk. e Body Language of a Winner A winner has their shoulders rolled back, their feet are firmly on the floor, they have an open chest, and they maintain their head held up. The more confident you appear, the more confident other people will assume you are indeed confident. Experts refer to this as the “high body power”. While you are teaching, make sure your arms are hanging loose, keep your head up, and roll your shoulders back. This is you taking control of the classroom and your own material. e Utilize the Whole Classroom While you are discussing the lesson for the day, walk around the room. Do not confine yourself behind your desk because you are putting a barrier between you and your students. By moving around the room, they will also be on their toes. e Be Expressive Use your facial expressions during your discussions. Encourage a student who is looking tentative in answering your question by adopting a thinking pose (placing your finger to your chin). It helps them to think about the question before giving their answer. Make eye contact with each of them to let them know that you know what they are up to, whether good or bad. e Voice Modulation You can use a wide range of vocal intonations when presenting new material. To illustrate, use a loud and soft voice when you are discussing opposite words like “big” and “small” respectively. Being animated with your voice keeps them engaged, especially for younger students. e The Positive Force Field This is composed of several positive body language that helps manage your students’ anxiety and help motivate them. The positive body language includes smiling, nodding, leaning, and using open palms. These gestures are saying that you, their teacher, is easily approachable The non verbal gestures mentioned here will help foster a good teacher student relationship. You can try other body language gestures that you might come up with, after all, your students are different from each other, hence, they would also respond differently. Chapter 26: Effective Body Language echniques for Negotiations and Sales | Ms = Achieving success in negotiations and sales is more than just giving the right pitch. Taking control of your body language is a powerful business tactic that you can use. It is always a good idea to meet people in person whenever possible instead of relying on phone calls, emails, or online chat. The lack of visual cues provided by body language would be a concern. It would be a challenge to build rapport, which is integral if you want to close a sale. So, for this chapter, we listed nine body language techniques to use when you want to improve your negotiation and sales skills. 1. Show up to the meeting on time. The initial impression yov’ll make on a potential boss or a new client happens before you step into the meeting room. Being there on time means you value time — other people’s and yours. Tardiness is often viewed as being discourteous, and for some it is insulting. It is an indication of a lack of integrity and incompetence. Also, it is a source of stress on your part, making you distracted. You have ruined your chances even before you say a word. 2. Give the perfect handshake. So, you’ve successfully arrived on time for your appointment, now the next most important thing — the handshake. There is actually no perfect handshake — it just has to make the other person comfortable meeting you. A firm handshake (not too tight, not too loose) connotes sincerity and honesty. 3. Choose the “right” people. Your body language and your attitude will determine the success of the negotiation process. However, your intuition also matters, especially when you are just setting up the appointment — the body language and non verbal cues of a potential client are important because they might be agreeing to an appointment, but their gestures are saying otherwise. It is still good for you if you choose to pursue those who are genuinely interested because you’ll have a better chance of closing a sale or having a successful negotiation. 4, Maintain eye contact. Eye contact is one most powerful tools in communication because it conveys sincerity, openness, and trust. Not making eye contact or deliberately avoiding keeps a good rapport from developing. You come off as dishonest, even evasive, both of which might make closing a sale or negotiating rather difficult. However, there is another side of eye contact — the negative aspect — which is deemed intimidating or aggressive. So, avoid staring or holding the gaze too long, it is natural to look away when you need to think. 5. Be mindful of your facial expressions. You have to be aware of the facial expressions you are giving. Sometimes our expressions are automatic, like how we frown or wrinkle our forehead when we’re frustrated or when in deep thought. The negative gestures might not sit well with the other person. Nod or smile in agreement whenever possible. Do not look down and keep your chin up. Like you, the other person will be carefully assessing if your physical gestures mirror the words you say, so keep them both positive and open. 6. Respect their personal space. Just as you want them to respect your personal space, you should respect theirs. It is important that you don’t make the other person uncomfortable because you are leaning too close. As a safe rule, especially in the business setting, sit or stand at least 4 feet away from them. 7. Keep your arms and legs calm and open. Just as your words exude confidence, strength, and calm, so should your body. Be mindful of how your arms and legs are positioned. If you are unconsciously tapping your fingers or your feet, or crossing and uncrossing your legs, you are sending a message that you are stressed or uncomfortable. Keep it together and limit your movements. Avoid fidgeting. People often fail at negotiations or in closing important sales because their words do not mirror their gestures and expressions. Be mindful. 8. Keep your hands down. If you are like most people who add a lot of hand movements when emphasizing an important point, you’ll have to be aware of these movements. A general rule in negotiating is to keep both of your hands away from your face. Constantly rubbing or touching your face or head can be seen as a sign of anxiety, and you cannot afford to be seen aS an anxious person. Exude honesty, confidence, and truthfulness by keeping your hands away from your face — but be mindful to keep your palms open. 9. Slow down and pause. The stress of the negotiation, plus the desire to get your message across is enough to make you overenthusiastic causing you to rush your words, or worst, talking over the other person. You should listen to what they have to say, pause if you must, to let them know that you’re thinking about what has been said, and keep your response calm and slow. This is an indication of having respect, yet you are still confident in your position. The positive effects of your momentary silence might even surprise you — your silence might spark the other person’s insecurities. So, this could go to your advantage. Remember to be mindful of both your words and your body language in any negotiation. Chapter 27: Body Language Mistakes to Avoid By now, you already know that body language plays a vital role in how other people view you. If you do not watch yourself, you might end up looking disinterested, bored, dishonest, or lazy. We have listed below some of the common mistakes people make in terms of their body language. Leaning Back When having a conversation with another person, leaning back may mean disinterest. It can also be interpreted as being dismissive. If you want the other person to know that you are interested in what they have to say, sit straight up or you can lean in. Crossed Arms (Legs) This also connotes disinterest. It also makes you appear closed off. Rather than crossing your arms, you can place your arms at your sides or on the table in front of you. Failing to Make Eye Contact If you do not make eye contact, you are signifying that you avoiding something. Show your sincerity by making eye contact. Too Much of an Eye Contact Not looking into another person’s eyes may make you appear dishonest but looking at them for too long could be interpreted as a sign of aggression. It can be intimidating and uncomfortable for the receiver of the gaze. During a conversation, hold their gaze for about two seconds before looking away. Make eye contact once in a while. Clasped Hands People who are under a lot of stress usually do this. Hands are Hidden Behind the Back or in the Pockets Most of the time, this is an unconscious action. The person who does this is perceived to be hiding something. Touching Your Face This is also often done unconsciously. It is a sign of deception. Too Much Nodding Nodding is a positive gesture but doing it far too many times may make you look weak and insincere. It can also be a sign of indifference. Fidgeting Fidgeting is a sign of discomfort or boredom. Slumped Shoulders It can be a sign of dissatisfaction or unhappiness. Wrapping the Feet (or Ankles) Around the Legs of a Chair This is similar to the clasped hand gesture. It is a sign of discomfort. Big Gestures Making big gestures (when you are not speaking on stage) is seen as being arrogant. Pointing Your Feet to the Wrong Way When you are speaking to another person, your feet could be pointing towards their direction. However, there are times that you unconsciously point your feet away from the other person. Patting Your Legs This is a sign of feeling uncomfortable. Glancing at their Phone or Watch When you think that no one’s watching when you try to sneak a peek at your phone or your wristwatch, someone does take notice. It connotes disinterest or boredom. However, it’s different when you are waiting for an urgent message, then you can check your phone. Failure to “Mirror” If you fail to intently listen to the other person as they speak, you fail to “mirror” their body language. We’ve discussed how important mirroring is in the previous chapters. Body language is important in any conversation. Take time to think about the list above. Take control. Be in control. Chapter 28: Body Language and Deception a > a x fin sates otal SS Spotting deception is hard. If you know the other person it could be easier, but still, it’s not foolproof. You may try to compare their behaviors between how they act when they are actually telling a known truth and when you think that they could be attempting to deceive you. It is important to focus on a large array of clues. Listed here are some of the most common lying gestures: e Hand covering the mouth — is a subconscious gesture that could mean trying to suppress or hide something. Covering your mouth is a lower key form as the “shhh” gesture where one finger is positioned vertically over your lips. e Touching the nose — is a sign that has many interpretations. e An itchy nose — may mean the speaker is trying to hide their own deceit. If done by the listener, it could mean that they are having doubts about what the speaker is saying. e Rubbing the eye — is actually your brain’s attempt to block out the deceit, lie, and doubt. e Tugging the ear — is the adult version used by kids who want to block out their mom’s lectures. It can also mean that the listener has had enough and may want to be the one to speak. e Scratching the neck — is a sign of doubt or uncertainty. e Pulling the shirt collar — is a signal that may mean that the person is trying to hide something or being deceitful. e Fingers in the mouth — is an unconscious attempt by the person to go back to the feeling of security of the child sucking their mother’s breast. This happens when one is under a lot of pressure and is also connected to deception. Chapter 29: Evaluate Yourself Take a look at this image above. You’ll immediately see an elephant. However, when you closely examine the image you’ll see a lot of other things. Most people look at other people and they see the other person’s physical attributes, which is superficial. What people fail to see are the details that they didn’t see at once. It is the same with body language. It has been in existence for a million years but it's only in recent years that people have started studying and understanding body language. For this last chapter, you are given the chance to review how well you can read body signals now after reading this book. Take note of your impressions in terms of perception. You’d be surprised. Reading Between the Lines 1. Read the 3 signs. Answers: The palms are in the submissive position. Fingers are spread which may mean non aggressiveness. The entire body is open, with nothing to be concealed. This is a non threatening and open attitude. 2. Read the 4 signs Answers: This is a deceit cluster. As he rubs his eye he looks away. Both eyebrows are raised in disbelief. His head is turned away, which is also slightly down. 3. Read the 4 signs Answers: She appears to be disapproving. She is giving someone a sideways glance and her body is not turned towards the same direction as her gaze. Her head is slightly down (a sign of disapproval), her eyebrows are turned down (anger), and her arms are crossed (defensive). The corners of her mouth are also turned down. 4. Read the 3 signs Answers: The catapult position signifies a know it all attitude. The feet on desk shows he’s being territorial. He is seated in a defensive position. 5. Read the 3 signs. A ae N; 4 Answers: Classic hands on hips which makes her look bigger and more menacing. The head is tilted towards her feet, but her eyes are looking upward. xua 6. Read the 12 signs. Answers: The woman in the center is facing forward. We’ll assume that the meeting is near her desk. One of her feet is placed forward which connotes assertiveness. Her eyes are looking upward, an obvious sign of visualizing. The palm on one of her hands is facing upward, which means she is welcoming and open to others. The woman on the left connotes assertiveness with one foot forward. Her hands are on her hips which means innate confidence. Her head is tilted upward, which indicates contemplation. The man appears to be scratching his head which is a sign of doubt and uncertainty. He could be thinking of an alternative approach to their situation. His feet are evenly planted, his hand is on the hips, which indicates a positive frame of mind about everything. 7. Read the 14 signs. Answers: The posture of the guy connotes confidence. One hand is placed on the wall which may indicate he is taking ownership of the space. His other hand is on his hip displaying a man’s assertiveness. His body is pointed directly to the woman on the right side, hinting at his primacy interest at that moment. Another sign of ownership is his crossed leg position. His baseball cap is turned sideways, showing a lot of confidence. The body of the woman in the middle is positioned away from him. This is a clear sign of defensiveness and disinterest. She makes a sideways glance which means apprehensiveness. Her arms are crossed tightly signaling defensive anxiety. The woman on the right appears confused. His body is pointed away from the man. Her feet are held together which means a neutral attitude or it may also mean he’ll have to work harder to impress her. She is glancing sideways which means she could be interested, or it could also mean uncertainty. The open wrist with the cigarette is an obvious sexual display of potential interest. She is blowing the smoke upward which means positive confidence. Chapter 30: Conclusion Experts say that if you change your body language, there are a lot of things you can change how you view life. You can change your mood right before stepping out, so you’ll feel more confident at work, become a more likable person, and be more convincing. Changing your body language allows you to interact differently with everyone around you and in tum, they will respond differently to you. Learning how to read body language allows you to easily read people so you tend to understand them more and make a better impression on others. Personally, you become more aware of your own body language, allowing you to be mindful of giving out positive movements and gestures.