Chapter 1: What is Manipulation? If you could force people to obey you, would you do it? If you could force the hand of someone else, even though you knew that they did not want to do what you were asking, would you be willing to do so? Perhaps you really need to borrow $5000 for a down payment on a car, but your parents are unwilling to give it to you. Maybe you really want to borrow your friend’s new motorcycle to experiment on it, but they are reluctant because you do not have a license. How likely are you to make it a point to move forward? What if your friend is in a relationship with someone who is abusive or just not right for her? Would you do anything in your power to convince her to end the relationship? All of that and more is possible with the power of manipulation. When you are able to manipulate people, you are effectively managing to influence the mind of the other person. You are able to figure out how best to control the other person and ensure that you can, in fact, take over once and for all. You can use your understanding of the other person’s mind in order to get them to do just about anything. If you can play your cards right, you can covertly access the mind of someone else, install all of the right strings, and play the other person like a puppet. This skill can be incredibly useful to you if you know what you are doing. You can figure out how best to take control of the mind of someone else. You can convince them to do your bidding, whether for your own or their own benefit. This chapter will introduce you to manipulation as a concept. You will learn how manipulation works as a concept. Lastly, you will be provided with several examples of types of manipulation that you may encounter in your daily life. Manipulation By definition, manipulation is a form of social influence that is designed to change either behaviors or perceptions of other people through methods that are deceptive in some way. Usually, the purpose is to allow the manipulator to get what he or she wants, even if it is at the expense of his or her target. Effectively, it is finding a way to coercively and secretly exploit someone else into doing what you want or need them to do. When you manipulate someone else, you have your own ulterior motive that you are pushing. You want to ensure that your desired result happens, regardless of whether it impacts you versus your child. For example, telling your child that he must tell the truth or you are going to die would be a form of emotional manipulation. You are putting excessive weight on the consequence that would never happen in order to coerce your child into telling you something. You may be trying to get him to tell the truth, but you are also doing so in a way that is emotionally harmful to the child. Sometimes, manipulation is a bit more difficult to spot—it can be finding ways to use insecurities against the victim without them being spotted. No matter what, however, what holds true is that manipulation is designed to override everyone’s inherent right to free will. This is not something to be proud of or to accept—if you are on the receiving end of manipulation, you should be trying to protect that free will as much as you can. If you are the manipulator, you may need to reconsider your motives and tactics. Keep in mind as you read through the rest of this chapter that this book does not condone the active and excessive use of manipulation. Controlling people is typically considered quite underhanded and cruel, and it should not be occurring on the regular, or at all if it can be avoided. It can be valuable to understand the art of manipulation in order to understand how the mind works, or how manipulators will attack, but ultimately, the use of true manipulation is not recommended. The Process of Manipulation People tend to believe that manipulation is effective for different reasons. They have different ideas about what makes manipulation effective. In particular, there are three criteria involving the manipulator that must be met in order to ensure that manipulation is successful. Ultimately, it is the manipulator that is primarily responsible for the manipulation and determining whether it will work, though there are certain personality traits that tend to be particularly vulnerable to the attempts to manipulate. The three criteria that must be met to ensure successful manipulation are: e The manipulator must hide the true intentions e The manipulator must know the victim’s most viable vulnerabilities e The manipulator must be ruthless enough to follow through Keep in mind that these three criteria being present is not a guarantee that the manipulation will always work. However, they must be present if it will work. Hiding true intentions If someone came up to you and said, “I am going to force you to buy me dinner,” you would be likely to outright refuse. People tend to be contrarian —they will lean toward doing the exact opposite of what someone else is asserting that they do simply because they want to have their free will. Because of this, manipulation only really works well when the true intentions are hidden. This way, the victim is unaware of the manipulation taking place and is more likely to fall for it. They will be unsuspecting and, therefore, more susceptible as opposed to if they were already on guard and looking for any attempts to force their hands. Understanding vulnerabilities Ultimately, the only way that you can possibly get to someone is if you know where their weak spots are. By taking advantage of the other party’s weak spots, you can effectively figure out exactly how to present what you want in order to ensure they give it to you. For example, if you know that you are dealing with a people pleaser, you may make it a point to mention that you have this really important need that you want to figure out how to meet and word it in just the right way that cues the other person to ask if they can help. This is an example of a vulnerability. Others can include: e They need to be given external approval e Fear of negative emotions e Unassertiveness e Struggling to know one’s true self e Struggling with self reliance e Feeling out of control e Being naive e Lacking self confidence e Being too conscientious Of course, there are other vulnerabilities as well, and you can begin to pinpoint more personal ones as well if you know what you are doing. Your job when manipulating others will be to figure out those vulnerabilities and use them. Ruthlessness Ultimately, manipulation is quite often harmful to at least one party that is being victimized. In most cases, the one being manipulated stands to lose something, and most people feel guilty at the idea of costing someone else something personal. For this reason, the successful manipulator must not care about the other person enough to be able to shirk off the guilt that would come along with hurting them. For many people, they are simply too empathetic to completely disregard everyone else. For others, however, it becomes effortless to simply disregard any guilt over feeling like they have used the other party. They move on with their lives after getting what they want without ever batting an eye. Manipulation Tactics Typically, manipulators exert some sort of control over their targets. They would have to in order to truly get their way. However, no two manipulators are the same. Some may favor positive reinforcement, while others prefer to punish. No matter the method, there is no denying that the manipulation can be exhausting, unhealthy, and sometimes completely dangerous. Within this section, we will identify the five distinct tactics that manipulators tend to use. Keep in mind that these tactics are separate from the techniques that will be discussed shortly. The tactics are sort of categories of different forms of manipulation—they are the most simplified form of classifying the techniques that you will be introduced to, and they use some sort of psychological tendency or process in order to control the other person. Positive reinforcement Rather than looking at positive as something good, think of positive as being provided or given something. When you are given positive reinforcement to encourage you to do something, you are introduced to some sort of motivator. You will get something as a direct result of your choice in action or in order to get you to do something. Action Positive Action performed atention/result reinforced For example, one form of positive reinforcement is being given praise or a reward for completing a task as you were expected to do. In particular, during manipulation, you may be offered praise if you do the right thing without being asked or encouraged to do it. Ultimately, it is designed to encourage. Other forms of positive reinforcement include: e Praise e Public recognition e Facial expressions e Approval e Love or affection e Gifts Negative reinforcement Negative reinforcement, on the other hand, involves using negative situations with the removal from that negative situation as the reward. When you are provided negative reinforcement, you are effectively being told that if you do something, a negative situation will be remedied in some way. This uses the negative situation and the desire to be rescued from that negativity as the motivation to push you toward a certain action. Negative Action Removal of Action situation performed negativity reinforced For example, imagine that you are in a bit of a bind—you may realize that you are $1000 short for your bills in three days and be panicking. A manipulator may say that they will give you that $1000 and therefore save you from the uncomfortable and terrifying potential of losing one’s home. Another example could involve telling a child that they will not have to do the dishes if they do whatever you want instead. Intermittent reinforcement Intermittent reinforcement refers to only sometimes providing positive reinforcement. Doing so causes doubt, fear, and a desire to keep trying to fish for that approval or positive reinforcement that is desired. The absence of whatever is being offered up intermittently can cause people to work harder to get it. Perhaps the easiest way to understand intermittent reinforcement is to look at gambling. In gambling, you are occasionally able to win, but most of the time, you lose. The occasional win and the knowledge that you have the chance to win are both enough for people to continually pour money into gambling, even though they are probably losing out on more money than they have ever won back. This form of reinforcement may be the most effective—it causes the individual to effectively become addicted to the chase toward success or fulfillment. Think about an abusive relationship for a moment—the victim will oftentimes become addicted to the intermittent reinforcement of the honeymoon period within the cycle of abuse, and that is enough to keep the individual stuck. Punishment When discussing punishment, you are thinking about the sudden inclusion of something negative as a response to a failure or refusal that is meant to be unpleasant in order to encourage the other person to act as you are hoping for. This causes the other party to give in, oftentimes, because the other party on the receiving end of the punishment is afraid or hurt, either physically or emotionally, and they want to avoid that same result in the first place. Think of fines when you get a ticket—the money you pay is, in part, administrative to take care of the cost of the police officer who issued the fine and the judge presiding over it. However, most of that fine is designed to punish you. You are losing out on a set amount of money because you have committed some sort of crime. Some examples of punishment include: e Yelling e Hurting (physically, i.e. spanking) e Playing the victim e The silent treatment e Nagging e Blackmail Traumatic one trial learning Finally, traumatic learning refers to the use of abuse or trauma in very specific instances in order to train the other party to feel like they must concede to avoid triggering such abuse in the future. Effectively, you are getting direct obedience through terrifying the other party into obedience in the first place. This is among some of the more harmful types of manipulation that people receive. Undesired action performed Manipulator severely punishes Action discouraged For example, you may find that you have returned home for the family for the holidays, and your partner drove over just a bit later—no big deal, sometimes families drive separately. However, your partner is furious that you went rather than staying home where you would have been present with him. He then screams at you about how you are never home or present for him and goes onto a rampage. The message that he is trying to send is that upsetting him is never worth it. Some forms of this include: e Abuse of any kind e Establishing dominance e Allowing emotions to blow out of control Manipulation Techniques Manipulation comes in several forms beyond those five different tactics. Some people may gaslight while others love bomb and devalue. Others still may choose to delve into mind control. There are several different manipulation techniques that can all be used in various situations, meaning that you always have plenty of options. What may work in one situation is not necessarily guaranteed to work in another, and most of the time, manipulators will have several different techniques in their back pocket to draw from as needed. Understanding each of these different forms of manipulation means that you can be prepared. When you are prepared, you become less susceptible to that form of manipulation. You will effectively be able to protect yourself because you know what the patterns are and can recognize them as they occur, allowing you to figure out giving in. This section will provide an explanation of the eight common methods that are used. Love bombing and devaluing This form of manipulation is particularly common in relationships with narcissists. The manipulator will shower the other person with love and gifts to essentially addict the individual to them. Then, when the manipulator wants something that is not being given, that love will suddenly be revoked, often with intentionally hurting or knocking the individual down a few pegs. They may stop responding or tell the victim that they no longer care about the other person. The idea is to make the victim desire that love bombing stage again to get them to work extra hard to attain it. It usually occurs in a cycle. Showering victim with love Victim tries to Love is slowly win back withheld favor more Victirn suddenly rejected This is the quintessential form of intermittent reinforcement. Gaslighting In gaslighting, the manipulator seeks to make the other party feel entirely incompetent and doubtful of whether or not they can truly accurately identify what is going on around them. The whole point is to make them feel unstable, and like their perceptions of reality, are incorrect. For example, they may tell the victim that the victim’s perception never happened, or that the victim is making things out to be far worse than they actually were. The gaslighter will deny and reject thoughts and opinions so convincingly that the victim will trust the gaslighter, and over time, the gaslighter will retain complete control. The silent treatment This is a common form of punishment in abusive situations. During the silent treatment, the person who is being ignored will be entirely erased— the individual will not acknowledge their presence or that they have said or done anything. If the one being ignored says something, the one ignoring will stare right past them. The entire purpose of this is to make the other person feel the displeasure that the manipulator is feeling. It can also lead to the individual being manipulated to be so desperate to get back to the way things used to be that they will comply with any requests provided. Guilt tripping The guilt trip tactic is designed to make the person being manipulated feel guilty simply because guilt is a motivating emotion, and the feeling of guilt is one that drives people to do whatever they can to alleviate it. If you are able to guilt trip someone, you effectively make them feel like the only way they can escape that guilt is through doing whatever you have asked them to do. For example, your sibling may tell you that they cannot afford to keep their home if you do not lend them the money and that if you refuse, it will be on you if their children are removed or if your sibling loses custody. Playing the victim Oftentimes, the manipulator will spin things around, so they reflect that the manipulator is actually the victim of the circumstances rather than the aggressor of the situation. For example, if a manipulator gets into an argument with someone else, they may tell everyone else that they were the victim in some way, shape, or form in order to gain sympathy. They will twist the truth in order to make sure that they are believed to not be responsible for whatever has happened. Scapegoating In scapegoating, someone else is made to take the fall for a situation. They may push all of their faults onto the scapegoat, particularly when a child is involved, but they may also simply refuse to give the same consideration to the one being scapegoated. This is another form of intermittent reinforcement. Mind control Another common method of manipulation is through mind control. When you are controlling the mind of someone else, you are effectively swaying them to do something that they do not want to do, even if it is not necessarily what they would want to do. This is usually a method that takes plenty of time, however, as the one doing the controlling has to first get into a trusted position with the person, then slowly work up to the situation and then take it when the time is right. Covert intimidation This refers to the sort of intimidation where you are not quite sure why you are feeling scared, but you cannot help it. You simply feel like something is going to go wrong or that there is some sort of problem that you will face if you do not make it a point to first do what was expected of you. In covert intimidation, you cannot quite put your finger on it, but you know that something is making you uneasy. Chapter 2: When and Why to use Manipulation Now, are you curious why people would choose to use this sort of manipulation? Why does anyone need that level of control over someone else’s actions or feelings? Who would use these forms of manipulation? Who actually is ruthless enough to follow through without guilt or regret? All of those are fantastic questions, and this chapter seeks to answer as many of those questions as possible. When these questions are answered, your portrait of the manipulator will become all the clearer. Who Manipulates? Manipulators come in several forms. Some are younger and simply have not learned how to interact with the world. Others still just happen to be manipulative by nature—they are intentionally using their abilities to get what they want with no regard for how it hurts other people. Ultimately, however, the manipulators tend to have several traits in common. This section will address several traits and tendencies that can help you identify a manipulator in the process of manipulating. They are always the victim It does not matter what has happened—the manipulator will always be the victim or not at fault in some way. The manipulator could pull out a gun and shoot you and would rationalize that he had no choice and insist that he was the victim as he holds the smoking gun in his hand. This is a common trait of manipulators as it makes them deserving of sympathy, which gives them the upper hand in many different situations. They will try to figure out how to get all of your friends and family on their side and will blame everything on you. The worst part is that since they are so skillful at doing exactly this, they can often convince other people to fall for it. They regularly distort the truth The manipulator will always twist reality. Skilled at weaving webs of lies, the manipulator will always have a way to rewrite history, change a situation, or otherwise make it, so their narrative is the correct one. One such example is playing the victim. Other times, they may simply make up lies because the lies suit them, such as saying that they are struggling to get to work because there was a car accident and that they will be there soon, or claiming that they cannot go outside to get to their car because a bear is sitting next to it. Some lies may seem incredibly unconvincing, but they will vehemently insist that he is telling the truth. They are passive aggressive Manipulators tend to be passive aggressive. A part of this is to make sure that you know your place around the manipulator—they use it to assert dominance and covertly exert their own influence and desire over you. For example, they will intentionally use passive aggression to make you feel bad, and then be satisfied that they held power necessary to make you feel bad in the first place. They will pressure you The manipulator is convinced that he is always right no matter what, and with that in mind, he will not hesitate to pressure you in order to get whatever he wants from you at any given moment. He knows that his way is the right way, and he will force the point until you agree. They will not work to solve a problem If you find that there is a problem with the manipulator, good luck—they will not work to come to some sort of solution. Instead, they will continue on as if nothing is wrong, or at the very least, that nothing is wrong with them. They could not care more about your own problems, so long as they are not the manipulator’s problems. They will always keep the advantage The manipulator has an uncanny way to always remain in control in nearly any situation. They will oftentimes find a way to ensure that they can find a way to stay in charge. They will always pick the restaurant that you go to, or they will always invite you out of your comfort zone and into theirs, all done intentionally to maintain power and control over the situation. When they do this, they effectively guarantee that they are able to stay in charge long enough to keep you off balance and make sure that they always have the upper hand. They will always have excuses When they do happen to make a mistake, manipulators typically will have some sort of excuse. There was a car accident on the way over, or they just got fired for no reason at all. It does not matter what the problem is; there will be some sort of excuse that will arise to take the blame away from the manipulator and push it onto someone else. They will make you feel unconfident Something about the manipulator will always leave you feeling incompetent and unable to do anything right. This means that you will constantly be feeling like you are the problem rather than seeing that the whole problem may have been resting firmly with the manipulator all along. Why Manipulate? Manipulators have all sorts of reasons to manipulate others, with some simply having no reason at all. When you begin to understand the motivation behind these drives, you may be more inclined to understand those techniques that the manipulators everywhere tend to use. This means then that you will be able to figure out how to fight back. You can defend yourself and others based on the knowledge that you have. Knowing why people manipulate others can be a critical skill to develop if you want to be successful in the world around you. They want to advance in life When you feel like you need to advance somehow, whether due to needing the money in order to get what you wanted or needed, manipulation is one way to get it. When you manipulate someone, you are usually using them as a sort of stepping stone for yourself in order to ensure that you can, in fact, withstand future struggles while also progressing the agenda that you have. Typically, this is the most selfish of the reasons on this list—these manipulators do so simply because they can. They need power and superiority Similar to the last reason for manipulation, oftentimes, manipulators need to feel like they are in power. They simply are only secure in themselves so long as they are in a position of power over other people. If they feel like their superiority will be questioned in any way, shape, or form, they will feel insecure. They will feel like the only way they can make themselves feel comfortable is if they exert and enforce their own superiority, which they give themselves through making a point to manipulate those around them. They need control When people are particularly controlling, they may find that manipulation is one of the easiest ways to get the results desired. When you are able to manipulate someone else into doing what they need to do, you are able to ensure that you maintain control in nearly any situation. You may have to find a way to covertly encourage the other person to do what you want, but as soon as you manage to do that, you can effectively maintain control, even if the other person does not realize that you are in control of the situation at hand. The need to be in control can be particularly motivating for people when it comes to deciding to manipulate. They need to manipulate to better their own self esteem Some people, such as narcissists, tend to feel like they are only comfortable with themselves when other people are lavishing them with attention or admiration. These people tend to result in manipulation to get that attention, especially if they are not particularly outstanding or deserving of attention in the first place. In manipulating other people into giving them the craved attention, they are able to feel better about themselves. They are bored Some people simply enjoy watching the world burn and will make it a point to manipulate other people simply to get entertainment. They treat it like a game or a challenge, intentionally testing boundaries to see how far they can get with no real reason or motivation beyond being bored to guide them. These may be some of the more dangerous manipulators as they have no real goal in mind—they simply want to wreak havoc and spend some time messing with other people despite not getting anything other than their own Satisfaction in return. They have a hidden agenda More often than not, the manipulator has some sort of reason to manipulate those around him or her. This is typically hidden from the target but can be figured out with enough time and information. Think about how some people will intentionally seek out vulnerable people with ulterior motives. They may marry in order to get their hands on money, or intentionally volunteer as a caregiver for an elderly family member in order to steal money from them. No matter what the hidden agenda is, the manipulator has good cause to try to keep it hidden. They do not properly identify with the emotions of others Sometimes, the manipulation is unintentional and a side effect of simply being unable to identify with other people. Effectively, they lack empathy, and that lack of empathy is enough to make it so they cannot easily identify when they have done something that is manipulative, nor do they automatically recognize when what they have done is problematic. These are people who simply do not understand social norms for some reason or another. They may have a personality or other mental health disorder. When Manipulation Occurs No one wants to be on the receiving end of manipulation, and yet it seems to be all around us. The world is literally surrounded by different people and their attempts to manipulate. You can see it on television and in the media. You can see it in religion and politics. It happens in all kinds of relationships when they become unhealthy. There is no real way to truly avoid manipulation, and that in and of itself can be incredibly disheartening. However, because manipulation is everywhere, it becomes prudent to understand what it looks like in a wide variety of situations and cases. You want to be able to notice when it is happening and figure out how best to fight back from it to ensure that you actually are able to protect yourself. When you are able to protect yourself from manipulation, you can guarantee that you, at the very least, are not regularly being used by other people simply because you refuse to allow yourself to be Within this section, we will take a look at manipulation in several different relationships and contexts for a brief overview of what to expect and why it happens. In relationships This is particularly referring to romantic relationships. Romantic relationships seem to attract manipulation frequently, especially if one member of the couple happens to be on the less confrontational side and is afraid of ever standing up for him or herself. When this happens, you may find that you have run into quite the conundrum—you need to figure out how best to leave a romantic relationship rife with manipulation, which can be difficult if the manipulator has done his job right. In particular, when you are in a relationship and at risk for manipulation, you will realize that the other party is likely to completely steamroll over the relationship. The other party may try to get you to move quicker than you are usually comfortable with, insisting that you advance your relationship to the next level in a whirlwind romance. If the person seems too good to be true in a situation like that, you can usually assume that it was full of manipulation in the first place and should be avoided if at all possible. In friendships Manipulative friends may try to get on your good side as quickly as possible, but they will soon fall into the habit of always needing you but never being available when you need them. At first, you will assume it is a coincidence, but over time, you will realize that it is actually a pattern, leaving you stuck to decide whether you would like to leave the friendship altogether or if you would prefer to instead put up with the manipulator’s lack of support and enjoy what you can. In churches Churches commonly also manipulate people, attempting to force them into situations and actions that they may not necessarily want. In particular, you will commonly see threats of damnation and punishment if they do not live by a very specific life, and that is a perfect example of manipulation. They use their authority to sort of force your hand and make you feel like you have no choice but to comply. This is what they count on—they assume that you will continue to donate, to serve, and to attend because they threaten you if you do not. While many people may not see it as a threat, being told that you may be excommunicated or that you will be damned for eternity are two ways to sort of scare someone into behaving a certain way. In politics Politicians frequently attempt to manipulate each other during debates and will attempt to manipulate the people during speeches. You can see it in the way they hold themselves and how they interact with each other that they are trained and scripted on what to do, and even the way that they stand has been scripted to avoid any of the typical discomfort signs, such as crossing arms. Instead, to be seen as more powerful, they may fiddle with a watch or a piece of jewelry to try to hide their gut reaction to show signs of distress. In cults Cults commonly use brainwashing techniques in which they may tear down entire personalities to install their own, more obedient ones in other people. They may welcome people with open arms, making them feel like they are welcome and will be happy, but over time, the manipulation and brainwashing will increase. Eventually, people are left as shells of themselves, forced to obey and do whatever they have been told if they want to avoid punishment. You can see these in extreme cults in particular, and cults can be so effective that leaders can literally command their followers to kill themselves or others, and they will do so, such as in the Jamestown cult, in which everyone drank flavored drink laced with poison as a mass suicide. In sales positions Sometimes, people in sales positions will have to get crafty with how they choose to present themselves in order to guarantee that they can, in fact, actually close a sale. They may choose to use certain appeals to authority or emotion in an attempt to convince you, or they may try to scare you into submission in other instances. No matter the situation, however, it is common to see salespeople try all sorts of influential attempts to get you to buy something. Even something as simple as asking you a few yes questions can be a form of manipulation taken from neuro linguistic programming, depending on if the other party is prepared with the techniques. In particular, much of the influence that you will see in sales settings tend to be persuasion or NLP. In court In court, when lawyers are often battling it out to figure out the truth, you may see manipulation. Especially if the lawyers happen to be particularly eager to prove their own positions, you may run into issues in which both parties start flinging manipulative attempts at each other. They may word their questions in a loaded manner to try to get the other party to fall for it. They may try to frame the other party or pressure them into confessing. Ultimately, even though the courtroom is supposed to be particularly unbiased, you can frequently see manipulative attempts to control each other play out. In negotiations Negotiations attempts are another area in which you may see attempts to manipulate or influence each other. Both parties have a certain desire, and they are likely to attempt to get their way in some degree. Of course, negotiations also come along with compromise, so some concessions will have to be made, but the individual responsible for those concessions may change depending on the results of the negotiation. Chapter 3: The Power of Persuasion Have you ever been trying to figure out what to do for dinner one night only to have your partner or child come up to you with a complete argument on why you should go to your favorite sushi restaurant for dinner? Perhaps the argument is all nicely laid out for you. Your child points out that you would not have to cook or clean, which means that you have more time to spend with your family, something that is in desperately short supply these days. Your child points out that everyone loves sushi, so you cannot go wrong going to the restaurant and that the whole family will find something to eat. Lastly, your child tells you that he knows that you really want to get some sushi because you always want to get some sushi. You may realize that your child is right—all of that is true, and you agree to go. In this instance, you have just been persuaded to go out to dinner by your child. Now, the argument and attempt to persuade may have been rather simplified, but it still counts as a form of influence. You were not thinking about going out to dinner until your child pointed out all of the reasons that you should. This means, then, that your child influenced your choice. Of course, most of the time, persuasion attempts tend to be a bit less obvious. They may be as simple as wording things in a way that is conducive to you making a specific decision. They may be pointing out that the other party knows best because the other party happens to be an expert on whatever is being sold. No matter the form, however, what persuasion does that manipulation does not is that it puts the question out in the open for everyone to see. Slightly more acceptable than its sister form of influence, persuasion focuses more on free will than covertly attempting to convince someone to give in and be controlled. In particular, you may find that you actually are okay with persuasion simply because it is more out in the open than the covert attempt to manipulate. They are quite similar, however, and within this chapter, you will be introduced to what persuasion is. What is Persuasion? Persuasion, like manipulation, is a form of social influence. It is designed to change the thoughts, feelings, or behaviors of someone else for reasons that are listed or dictated for the other person in the bid to get the other person to change. This means that the other person is well aware of the attempt early on. Just as your child pointed out that you would love to go to sushi for dinner, any other form of persuasion is going to be telling you what you should be wanting or doing. It will encourage you to do something in particular in an attempt to persuade you, but you are still always welcome to turn it down and move on with your initial choice. Typically, persuasion is incredibly powerful. You are creating an argument of some sort for someone else and attempting to follow through with that argument. You want other people to see that your argument is valid and that you have the right idea. You want to figure out how to do just that without there being a clear and easy way to get out of it. All this means that you need to figure out what will motivate your target and then figure out how to motivate them. This usually happens in several different ways, such as in the principles of persuasion or with the understanding and usage of rhetoric. What is true, however, is that you should end up with someone who has at least some sort of idea about what they want by the end of the attempt. They will either agree with you, or they will disagree and move on, and it will be up to you to figure out which. Persuasion vs. Manipulation At face value, the two seem to be intricately linked—they are both attempts to convince or cause someone to do something else. However, you likely persuade someone nearly every single day, and yet you may make it a point to never manipulate others. You are able to toe the line because the two are entirely different from each other. In particular, however, you must look at the differing definitions of the two attempts to influence. In manipulation, you are attempting to change via unfair means for one’s own selfish purposes. For persuasion, however, you are looking to cause someone to do something. This means that primarily, manipulation is unfair or secretive by default—it seeks to use and abuse people in order to satisfy the manipulator and whatever it is that the manipulator wants. Persuasion, on the other hand, is simply a way that people interact with those around them. You are attempting to persuade someone to help you because you feel like they may be a valuable asset, and you think that they will get something out of it, too. You are completely upfront about everything when you attempt to persuade someone, however when you manipulate, you are not. For example, consider that you really need a ride to work tomorrow for some reason. You go up to your neighbor and say, “Hey, you know, I noticed that your yard could use some TLC—would you like me to help you with that today? I’m free all day!” The neighbor agrees, and the two of you happily chat while taking care of yard work. The neighbor, upon finishing everything up, asks if you need any help yourself, offering to reciprocate. You reply that actually, you need a ride to work, and you would greatly appreciate it. On the other hand, if you had wanted to manipulate the neighbor into a ride, you may have gone out in the morning like usual and desperately tried to start your car while groaning loudly and slamming on the steering wheel before looking at your watch in exasperation. In this case, you are not interacting with the other person directly at all—you are making it clear that you are unhappy, but you are not speaking to your neighbor. Your neighbor happens to see your plight and offers to help you, getting your ride without you ever having to ask for help. That is manipulation. You intentionally did something with your own self interest in mind. You did not help your neighbor, and simply took advantage of his kindness when he offered to give you a ride without any offer for reciprocity. As you can see, manipulation versus persuasion can be a bit complex to figure out if you do not know what you are looking at, but it is important. Effectively, when you are manipulating someone else, you are attempting to make them do something for you without you having to overtly ask for it in any way. Using Persuasion Between the two, persuasion is generally deemed to be socially acceptable and something that will not be problematic for you if you were to be on the receiving end of it. You may not feel like persuasion is particularly threatening in the way that manipulation typically is considered simply because when someone attempts to persuade you, they are usually honest with you. They will tell you exactly what they want or need and they will usually offer up reasons for why you should help them, which may sometimes be a negotiation of services or otherwise simply appealing got logic or something else to prove that you helping would literally be no inconvenience to you, but would be a lifesaver to them. When you are planning to use persuasion against someone else, you are likely to need some sort of plan. Generally speaking, you will need to know exactly what you want and how you need to get to that result. If you want to get a job, for example, you may realize that the steps to get a job will require you to be applying for jobs and working on your resume as much as possible. You may see that there is little room for error and that you will need to actively attempt to find that job. When you make your plan, you can start to figure out who you will ask for help. Do you know anyone with some connections? Do you have a friend that works somewhere with job openings? Do you have any skills that can get you that job that you really need or want? If you can answer yes to any of that, you can figure out who you want to target for your persuasion. After all, there always has to be someone on the receiving end when you attempt to persuade someone. Upon identifying who you will persuade, you must figure out how you wish to persuade them. Now, this will be a bit trickier to figure out—there are dozens of ways that you could go about trying to persuade someone, and ultimately, you will need to choose the one that works best for you. When you can identify exactly how you wish to be persuading someone else, you can begin to put together the best possible toolset to do so. Now, we will not get into the tools for persuasion until the next chapter, so hold tight on that particular concept. However, recognize that there are several persuasive techniques that can be used, so long as you make it a point to use them effectively. With the plan in mind and the tools in mind, and recognizing that you are not only persuading to get help, you need to figure out what you are willing to offer in return. Why should the other person help you? Will you do something in return? Will it benefit them in any way? Remember, manipulation is the one that is self serving. When you are persuading someone, everyone should see at least some sort of benefits to helping or agreeing to whatever you are attempting to persuade them of. Finally, with the who, what, how, and why figured out, you can now attempt to use your technique. Now is the time to go up and talk to whomever you have identified as the individual that you are asking for help. Remember, you should probably try asking them if you can help them before slamming onto the theme of everything that you are looking for from them. This means that you can make it a point to ask and persuade. You should point out all of the reasons that helping would be good for the other person, as well as what you will do in return. Persuasion is a give and take, after all, and you need to be clear to the other person that you absolutely intend to give as well as take to ensure that they do not feel pressured or stuck in the process. When you do this, you assure them that you are not simply using them, especially once you follow through with helping them. Persuasion in the World At this point, you should have a generally solid idea that persuasion is something that can involve give and take—that either the giver or both people should benefit. As a general rule, the taker should never be the only one benefitting from persuasion. You can see this happen in several contexts. You may see people shopping for a house and notice that persuasion happens during the sales. You may see that persuasion happens in regular interactions with your romantic partner simply as a side effect to the fact that you two regularly interact with each other and will often have something or another that you really want or need. You can see it in parenting, and in negotiations as well. Leaders are also masters at persuasion—especially if they are effective leaders, and you will often see that the best leaders are well loved and incredibly persuasive. They know how to wield their tools so well that those around them are always willing to help. This section will take the time to go over several contexts in which you may run into an attempt at persuasion throughout your life. It is incredibly common to see persuasion pop up regularly because it is so regularly used in terms of interactions. If you want someone to do something, the best way to get them to do it is by asking them to do it. If you can do that, you are well on your way to persuading them. In sales When you are buying something, such as a car, you may run into someone who is interested in attempting to sell you something that you were not necessarily interested in at first. In order to be an attempt at persuasion, the newly presented car should do something for you—it should be useful to you in some way, shape, or form, and it will be on you to determine if the use of that new car is enough to encourage you to move forward with getting the new car or if you want to stick with whatever your original choice was. Perhaps you went in for a small sedan because you do not like to drive anything much large. However, you have two young children, and you find that you are always frustrated that you do not have enough room for car seats, a stroller, a diaper bag, and any shopping you may do during the day. This means that your car, despite being one that you are comfortable driving, is not one that you are necessarily going to be comfortable in using on a regular basis. The salesperson sees that you need some more space and recommends some compact SUVs to you as well. They are just big enough that they will actually accommodate the rest of your belongings without causing you to struggle to fit some groceries when you run to the store during the day as well. Now, to be fair, the SUV is a bit more expensive, and you know this. The salesperson knows this too, and you can presume that the salesperson is going to get a slightly larger commission on the SUV as opposed to the sedan. However, after mulling it over, you realize that the salesperson was right— you need the space. You need room for your children, their necessities, and anything that you may get when you are out, and your stroller barely fits in the trunk as it is without anything extra. You then decide to go with the SUV. Now, what makes this persuasion and not manipulation is the attempt to make sure that you know what you are doing and that the salesperson is genuinely trying to help you. Now, if the salesperson were simply trying to convince you to get the largest car on the market with the most expensive monthly payment, that would have been more along the lines of manipulation, but considering that your salesperson showed you some reasonable options and did not push the point, it was considered to be persuasive instead. In relationships You can see this sort of give and take play out in relationships, too—for example, imagine that you and your partner are ready to take the next step and move in together. However, neither of you really wants to let go of your apartment. Ultimately, the best way to get one of the two of you out of their home and into the other’s home is through persuasion—you will both have to come up with the reasons to stay in your own respective apartments while the other party moves. Because neither of you are attempting to underhandedly manipulate your way into staying in your own home and you are both willing to calmly consider what is going on and what the reasons for staying or going would be in order to rationally decide the best course of action, this is considered an attempt of persuasion. In parenting In parenting, the best thing that you can do is learn t0 talk to your child, so they understand you clearly and effectively. This means that you need to figure out how best to communicate with your own child, and that could very well be different than what you would use for someone else that you know or with someone else’s kid. If you can effectively learn to communicate with your child, you can then use persuasion on a regular basis. When you are raising a child, what you are doing is trying to figure out how best to help them become responsible, mature adults that are productive and capable of interacting with those around them. This means that they need to develop skills such as how to persuade someone or how best to communicate when they need something. This means that you should teach by example—you should talk to your child using the same persuasive patterns that you would use for a friend or family member. For example, if they really want a cookie and ask nicely for one, you could very politely say, “I am so proud of you for using your manners! But you know, dinner is about to be finished, and you need to make sure that you Save room to eat your dinner. How about we have it tomorrow after lunch because you don’t need sugar after dinner.” This involved you negotiating a new time for eating the cookie and your child agreeing. Now, of course, you could have simply said, “No cookie; it’s too late,” and had that be the end of discussion, but that would not have been doing your child any favors. Instead, you are making it clear that good communication skills are critical if they want to be successful at all. You are helping them become the best possible adults that they can be because you are teaching them skills such as persuasion early on. In negotiation Negotiation is something that only certain people will deal with on a regular basis, but nearly everyone will face it at one point or another. If you need to negotiate with someone, persuasion is the perfect way to begin attempting to get someone to see your own side. Effectively, you can lay out your argument for having things done your way, offering up your own concessions, and then seeing what happens next. You want your negotiation partner to feel willing to accept the deal that you have put out without feeling like they are being taken advantage of because taking advantage is not one of the main purposes of persuasion—being fair and forthcoming is. At work Finally, at work, you are likely to need persuasion at some point in time. Do you need a day off for a trip? You will have to persuade your boss that you need it. Do you want a raise? Why do you deserve it? How will your own productivity change if you get that raise in order to warrant it when you ask? What can you possibly do to make that raise worthwhile? Beyond just negotiations with employers, however, you also need to be prepared to negotiate with clients or business partners, and you will need persuasion to make you effective at those as well. Ultimately, nearly any time you need to ask someone to do something, you are effectively trying to persuade them to do something. This is exactly why persuasion is so incredibly important to have a solid grasp upon. Chapter 4: Mind Control Techniques with Persuasion Now, you have seen just how critical persuasion can be in several different contexts. At this point, it is time to start seeing the techniques that you can use to persuade other people. Remember, persuasion is all about being clear about what you are asking for. However, on the other hand, it is also about convincing people to do what you want. You need to be able to walk along that fine line without falling on either side if you want to be effective. This chapter will introduce you to both the principles of persuasion and the rhetoric of persuasion. You will be guided through each and every step of the persuasion and provided with the reasoning that you should make it a point to truly develop these skills. Each has its own important uses if you are willing to put in the effort to learn them. Principles of Persuasion First, we will discuss the principles of persuasion. These are six different persuasive tools that you can use in order to convince those around you to behave in certain ways. They can be used on their own or in tandem with others on this list. However, what is important is that you remember that these tools are useful, and you practice them whenever you get the chance. Authorit Social proof Authority The first of the principles of persuasion is authority. When you seek to appeal to authority, you are simply trying to make yourself into some sort of authority figure. This is for a very specific reason. Stop and consider for a moment—would you rather take medical advice from a random person walking down the road or from a doctor wearing a lab coat and a badge? Which would seem more convincing to you? If both of them held out a pill in their hand and urged you to take it, would you? Many people would be willing to be treated by the doctor in the coat and with a badge. They are deemed to be an authority on medicine just because they happen to be wearing a lab coat and have their credentials printed out on their badge. The other person, however, is some random nobody, and even if they were to say that they are a doctor, you would have no way of knowing for sure, nor would you be able to verify what was being offered to you to take. Ultimately, this is exactly the kind of divide you would see ordinarily— when there is an appeal made to authority, the one who is knowledgeable wins out. The one deemed to be more of an authority due to credentials or experience wins out in the end. This means that when you want to appeal to authority, what you need to do is make sure that you find a way to make it clear that you are, in fact, an authority on the subject. If you are the car salesperson, maybe have letters and pictures from your happy clients that have bought cars from you and left fully satisfied after your help. Maybe you should pay attention to the fact that when people walk in, the first thing you want them to see is that you are qualified at your job. You may set up so they can see your diploma or awards, or you will make sure that they hear about it in the first few minutes of the meeting. Commitment and consistency The next principle of persuasion is known as commitment and consistency. When you are dealing with commitment and consistency, you are effectively playing on the fact that people tend to like what is familiar and expected. This means that people will always try to continuously follow through on a commitment that they have made, and the more often that they make that particular commitment, the more likely they are to continue to make that commitment with it eventually just becoming standard. For example, say you asked your neighbor, who happens to be your coworker, for a ride to work. It is literally no inconvenience because you both travel both ways at the same time. After several drives in which your coworker takes you to work, it eventually becomes expected, and you no longer have to ask—you are simply waiting by your neighbor’s car before and after work each day to catch that ride. Effectively, the first time they agreed to take you, they locked themselves into a chain of repeatedly being asked by you for rides and agreeing to do so on a regular basis. People love to be consistent—it is valuable to be consistent, and because of that, people will usually continue to follow through, even if they do not like it and do not want to continue. You can trick people into doing things for you with this same process as well. If you want something, such as maybe wanting your coworker to cover a shift for you, you may start by asking a simple yes question, such as asking if they have had a nice week so far. Your neighbor says yes, and then you ask if they will trade shifts with you so you can make sure that you are able to go to a concert that you have been looking forward to. Thanks to having already begun to say yes to other things, your coworker is going to be in a state of mind in which he or she is already saying yes, so they may as well continue. After agreeing to a few smaller things as well, you may run into someone who is willing to accommodate more difficult or larger requests in the name of consistency. Liking This is perhaps one of the most straightforward of the principles of persuasion—all you need to remember is that the more you like someone or something, the more likely you are to feel like whatever you liked is valuable, and the more likely you are to be convinced in its favor. For example, you are more likely to do a favor for someone that you really like than someone that you do not like at all. Luckily, there are several ways that you can make it a point to become likable to someone else. You can, for example, mirror someone until they like you. This means that you would be copying their behaviors as covertly as you could possibly manage, which may not be particularly secretively if you do not know what you are doing. Upon setting everything up and mirroring the other person to the point that they mirror you back, you should be good to continue. However, if you are unsure how to proceed with mirroring or you simply do not want to deal with it, there are other techniques you can use as well, such as choosing to intentionally make someone like you. This is not nearly as difficult as it sounds. Start by making some sort of connection between yourself and the other party—perhaps you make it a point to comment that you can relate to the other person when they arrive with their child to an appointment. You tell them that you have a child about the same age and that going back to work at that age is just so difficult. With the connection made, you will want to make eye contact and continue to talk. You may offer the other party some praise or a compliment, meant to make them feel like you genuinely care about what they are saying or what they think. The catch here is that the compliment that you make has to be genuine, and you must mean it. Finally, if you want to be likable, you must make it clear that the two of you are on the same side. Perhaps you point out that you will both be working together toward getting the other person a car. Maybe you convince them that you will both try to solve their problem, no matter what it is, with them. This camaraderie set up then makes it less likely for the partners to worry about them. Create a sense of teamwork Make a Offer a Connection compliment Reciprocity The next principle of persuasion is reciprocity. When you are appealing to reciprocity, effectively, you are working with the attitude that you will help anyone that helps you first. You make it clear that you are happy to help them if you think that they will respond in kind. This is not nearly as entitled as it may seem upfront. Think about how, when a friend buys you a gift, you feel like you must reciprocate? This is intentional with human development—it is done, so you feel the urge to reciprocate when someone else is offering you something. This means that when someone else has helped you, you will be more inclined to help them when they need help. You effectively safeguard with your own altruistic behaviors to make sure that both you and the other party are able to receive in your times of need. If you want to take advantage of this, for example, you may start by reaching out to someone that you need help from. Maybe you want your neighbor to take care of your dog while you go out of town overnight. You then offer to do something for your neighbor. Perhaps you clean up his yard before asking him if he can take care of your dog for the day. You let him know that all he will have to do is let your dog out a couple of times, and things will be fine. After having been helped by you, he feels obligated to follow through and help you out as well. He agrees to take care of your dog during your trip, and that is one less thing for you to worry about over the next several days. Scarcity Scarcity refers to supply and demand. Effectively, the more regular or readily available something or someone is, the less important it is. You can often see this with material items—limited edition items tend to be far more in demand than the same item in a standard color. For example, if you really want that newest game console, but you want the one specific to your favorite game series, you are likely going to have to find it on a used sale site and hope that you can find it at a regular price. Otherwise, you will have no choice but to simply trudge on ahead without that particular console. This is because the regular console is common. It is easy to attain and therefore is not particularly important to you, nor is it deemed as valuable as the regular one to you. Now, you may be wondering how supply and demand can relate to persuading someone to do something. The answer is that you need to make sure that you are able to convince them that you are in demand. Perhaps you find that your partner seems to take you for granted. If you have a serious talk with your partner about how you do not feel loved or respected, and during that talk, you mention that you would rather be anywhere but there because it is so exhausting to live completely unwanted. This should cue to your partner that you will not always be available—you are only available as long as you wish to make yourself available, and that immediately ups your value. You can do this with other people, too. Reject the first attempt to schedule something with you and say that the date does not work for you. When you get to a date just a bit later, you can convince the other party that you are worth the money that will be put into you. You want people to feel like they got lucky to get you. After all, you are one of a kind—treat yourself like it. Social proof Finally, social proof refers to the tendency of people to fall for peer pressure. This is effectively just a fancy word for peer pressure and involves you actively making a point to choose to defer to what other people are doing. If you do not know what you should be doing, you effectively decide to defer to what you see around you. If you see that your peers are dancing in a circle, but you do not know why they are dancing in a circle, you are likely going to just join in without understanding why, and that is okay. You do it anyway and never find out why. When you want to use this form of persuasion effectively, you will just want to set up a control area. Do you remember why so many manipulators liked the home court advantage? It is so they are able to manipulate their surroundings. You can do this, too. For example, if you want someone to do something for you, make sure that you ask them around other people that are actively doing whatever it was that you asked them to do in the first place. For example, if you want to go around and collect signatures and donations for a cause, you would want to be sure that those around you are actively seeing that you are getting what you want. When they see that other people are signing and donating, they are more likely to do so, especially if they recognize names, or they feel like they need to keep up with their peers. Effectively, then, this works well to keep people in line just by maintaining the environment around them. Rhetoric Another series of techniques that can help you become more persuasive is the art of rhetoric. Rhetoric is the art to speak or write persuasively in an attempt to get other people to see things your way. Dating way back to the time of Aristotle, the ancient Greek philosopher, if you are able to form your arguments with rhetoric, you can make sure that you are addressing other people in a way that is compelling and difficult to reject or ignore. In particular, rhetoric involves three distinct methods of persuasion—these are three techniques that are commonly used in order to make sure that the other person is likely to go along with your suggestion. These are commonly referred to by their Greek names of Ethos, Pathos, and Logos. Ethos Appeal to Appealto Appeal to character emotion logic Builds Builds Builds reasons credibility for emotions for for the speaker the listener compliance Ethos Ethos is an appeal to character. It focuses on making sure that the one presenting all of the information for the listener is viewed as credible. If the speaker is not credible, no one is going to believe in what he or she has to say, which means that his or her attempts and techniques will be particularly worthless. After all, you cannot clearly convince someone else to do something if they do not trust you. This is essentially quite similar to the appeal to authority in the principles of persuasion. Ethos primarily can be seen in advertising—when you are trying to sell something, you want to make sure you have someone credible be the one advocating for your product, and staying true to that, you often find that celebrities commonly are called in to promote the brands. Of course, those people are being paid for their time and endorsements, but the effect is undeniable. For example, imagine a local sports personality making it clear that he always drinks one particular brand of soda without fail. The next time that you are in the mood for soda, if you happen to be a fan of that particular person, you may find that you are far more likely to pick up that same brand of soda simply because your unconscious mind wants to emulate someone that you are fond of. This works precisely because people admire others, and when they do admire someone else, they want to emulate them. People naturally want to be like the people they look up to or admire in any way, and because of that, they will be more likely to make decisions based on those admired individuals. Pathos The next form of rhetoric that is commonly used is pathos—this is an appeal to emotions. This is effectively coming up with a way to establish an emotion in your listeners in hopes of getting them to act in a way that you want to see. You may make someone feel sad or guilty in order to get them to donate. You may try to make someone angry in order to make them act. You may try to make someone feel happy to encourage them to like whatever you are promoting. Ultimately, emotions are so powerful precisely because they are meant to be motivating. You are going to naturally feel inclined to act according to your emotions simply because that is why they are there. Your emotions are effectively your unconscious mind’s way of interacting with your body, creating emotional impulses that are meant to keep you alive. You may feel fear when you are being chased by a hungry mountain lion, or anger when someone threatens you—this is because your emotions are meant to help you survive, and when you are angry, you are more likely to stand up for yourself, or when you are in danger, you need to be able to act in a way that will keep you alive. By creating the necessary emotions, you can usually begin to persuade those around you to act; however, you want or need them to. If you need someone to be angry and act, you figure out the best way to instill that anger. If you need help, you instill a sense of obligation or guilt. If you need to keep someone complacent, you want them to feel content and relaxed. A lot of the time, people will instill these emotions through stories, quotes, and vivid language. For example, if you are at a fundraiser to benefit a children’s hospital that sees a large number of patients with cancer, you may be told stories of how being on that floor is a parent’s worst nightmare and that sometimes, what they want more than anything else is to see their children doing something normal—they want that sense of normalcy to cling to because they do not know if they will be taking their children home at the end of the journey, and some people know for sure that they will not be taking their children home. The speaker may involve photos of sick children and sobbing parents, all designed to make the audience sad or guilty, especially if they have their own children at home. In their guilt and sadness for those parents in the story or slideshow, more people are willing to donate. Logos An appeal to logic and reason is the final form of rhetoric. With Logos, you are seeking to establish as much reason as possible that cannot be denied to do whatever you are requesting. You may point out the numbers and facts that support what you are asking for, or otherwise use studies that support your opinion. Those using Logos have a tendency to throw as much data as possible at the other person, hoping that something will stick. Of the forms of persuasion, this may seem like the most valid—after all, how do you fake statistics and studies? However, the problem with this form of persuasion can arise in the fact that it is incredibly easy to misconstrue or misuse statistics, especially if those statistics are not being fact checked, or the listener does not feel the need to question them. For example, consider the difference between correlation and causation— you can present two different statistics as correlation, but many people will immediately assume that there is causation, despite the fact that there may be none at all and the similarities in statistics may be nothing but coincidence .Perhaps the most easily imagined form of this is to consider that as the sales of ice cream increase, so does the rate of violent crime. To someone not familiar with statistics or correlation vs. causation, they may automatically assume that ice cream and crime are linked. However, they both are simply results of the temperature rising. Ice cream sales tend to go up during the hot summer months, but crime also happens to go up as the heat makes people’s tempers shorter than ever. They are not actually related at all beyond both having the same root cause. Chapter 5: Influencing Others with the Science of Persuasive Psychology Thus far, we have thoroughly discussed the concepts and techniques behind how to persuade others, but have not actually looked at the act of being persuasive. There is more to persuasion than just theory, and while the theory is important, there should also be equal, or more, consideration given to the methods through which you can be persuasive. These methods will utilize the principles of persuasion and rhetoric, but they will also serve as instructions on how to be persuasive in general. You cannot simply say that you must appeal to emotions and then leave it at that—there are other persuasive techniques that exist. We will be taking some time to look at how the one being influenced takes the persuasion offered. You will be seeing why and how these methods work and how to use them. You will be considering exactly how you can influence the decisions that other people make without having to coerce or force the other party to do what you are asking. Instead, you will be focusing on how best to convince them that they ought to have a certain mindset or make a certain decision. Within this chapter, you will take a look at how persuasive psychology is built up, specifically looking at the emotionally intelligent leader, who is able to gather followers with ease, and then extrapolating beyond that particular individual to others as well. You will see how emotional intelligence encourages people to become persuasive individuals that they are without ever having to coerce or force. After painting the background to what persuasive psychology utilizes, you will be guided through four different methods that you can use to ensure that you can persuade others to do as you wish. As you proceed, keep in mind that one of the most defining differences between persuasion and manipulation is that the one being persuaded can always choose not to do what is being requested. The persuader honors free will, and while the persuader may try to guide the individual toward what they want, it will never happen in a forced manner. Saying no to the request is still an acceptable result. Persuasive Psychology and Influence Consider, for a moment, the most influential person that you personally know. They may be someone that you regularly interact with—a teacher, a boss, or a friend. What makes them so influential? The answer may not be that they are smart, funny, or handsome—but rather, they are emotionally intelligent. Emotionally intelligent individuals tend to be far more likely to convince other people to do what they want or need simply because they know how to present themselves .They know how best to interact with others and are able to sense the best way to proceed. Interestingly enough, many of the actions that the emotionally intelligent individual uses to try to persuade others happen to line up almost perfectly with the principles of persuasion and with rhetoric. They know how to utilize those particular techniques almost instinctively, and the end result is someone who is incredibly skilled at persuasion. This also happens to lead these emotionally intelligent individuals to be the ones that others go to for guidance as well. If you knew that your friend always seemed to make the right decision, after all, you would likely go to them any time that you felt like you were at a crossroads and were unsure of what to do next. This is simply because you trust that friend’s judgment and know that they would not lead you astray. Effectively, then, your ability to be persuasive with other people will naturally increase simply by learning to be emotionally intelligent. That is perhaps the best way to naturally increase your persuasiveness without having to consciously think about how to persuade others. When you do have to think about it, however, the best way to figure out how to persuade someone is to figure out the best approach. Are you looking to lead someone to a decision that requires you to be authoritative? This would be if you were attempting to sell someone on something. Are you looking to get a friend to do a favor for you? You may want to use an emotional appeal to make them feel like they need to help someone that they care about. Do you want to make a whole crowd choose an action that you are attempting to push? If so, you may want to use loaded words and stories in an attempt to get them all motivated the same. Do you need a single person to do you a favor? Start by asking if you can help them. As you can see, there are several different techniques that must be used at any given moment to help make your message more persuasive. However, you must be able to figure out the best way to convince other people. You can simplify the act of figuring out how best to convince someone to do something into a few steps. First, you will start by identifying the target for your persuasion. Then, you must figure out the nature of the persuasion that you will be using—are you persuading someone as an authority that should be listened to or as someone that is deserving of help? Next, you must figure out how best to get whatever you are hoping to get, and lastly, you must use the methods and techniques you have decided upon. Identify the Identifythe Identifythe target of nature ofthe method of persuasion persuasion persuasion Create an Appeal to Needs What drives you to act in your life to survive? We are not talking about things that you enjoy right now, but rather, what compels you more than anything else? The answer to this is a need—your needs keep you motivated to act toward fulfilling them. You will always be motivated to find food when you are hungry, for example, or to find shelter when you are too cold. This is because you have basic human needs to meet that keep you alive. Your needs can vary from physical needs to keep yourself alive all the way to how to feel fulfilled, and ultimately, these motivators are incredibly compelling. Before delving into creating and appealing to needs, let’s stop and go over the basic hierarchy of needs. Take a look at the pyramid below: As you can see, at the base, you have the most important needs. These are the needs for food, water, air, shelter, warmth, and reproduction. These are the bare minimum needs to stay alive and to reproduce, as is the biological imperative. In general, you must meet the bottom three tiers of needs before you can begin to work on yourself. Self actualization Love and belonging Physiological needs Each of these categories manage different sorts of needs for you, and ultimately, people are always striving to do better and move from one to the next. These categories encompass needs such as: e Physiological needs: The need to survive and be healthy physically—food, water, air, shelter, reproduction, warmth, etc. e Safety needs: The need to feel safe and secure, such as the need for steady access to resources and health e Love and belonging needs: The need to feel like you belong with others—this is friendship, intimacy, and a sense of connection with others e Esteem needs: This is a need for respect and recognition e Self actualization needs: This is a need to be the best person that you can be Ultimately, people are always striving for the top—self actualization. However, you cannot work toward self actualization if you are hungry or unsafe. You need to secure the bottommost needs before you can work at the top. When you want to create a need that you can use, you may find that sometimes, identifying a previously existing need can be easier .However, you can also create a sense of urgency to meet one of these needs. For example, imagine that you are selling a car. You are really working to persuade someone to get a very specific car, though you know that they are not particularly interested in it. One way to create an appeal to a need is to mention that the car that the people are interested in does not have the best ratings in terms of safety. You point out that the car has been known to underperform in accidents, and that the one that you are pushing for tends to be safer simply because it is bigger and sturdier, or it has better safety ratings. By appealing to that need for safety, you are more likely to get them to agree to buy that particular car. If they are not concerned about safety, you can appeal to a need to belong—you can point out that other people also tend to prefer that one car that you would like to sell over the one they are interested in and provide the evidence to support that claim. Loaded Words Another commonly used method to persuade other people is through using loaded language. This is the act of using words or language that has very specific connotations in hopes of changing the way that the other person perceives what is being talked about. Effectively, you are using words that typically attract attention or are seen as particularly beneficial bonuses. Imagine that you are trying to sell a new baby food brand. You have worked hard to develop the image for the food, but you realize that people do not usually buy a food that they know nothing about—they tend to go with trusted brands that they know and can trust will be safe or deliver what they wanted. You may be stuck trying to figure out how best to break into the scene to actually get on the market and convince people to buy. One such method of convincing others is through using loaded words and images. You will want to make sure that you are constantly utilizing words or images that are perceived as strongly positive. For example, think about what it is that parents want for their newborn children. You may acknowledge that most parents want to ensure that their children are happy and healthy and that they are not exposed to chemicals or other additives that may make them sick or cause a reaction. After all, babies are believed to be incredibly fragile, and because of that, parents tend to go all out in making sure that their children only have the best. You may, then, decide that you will be appealing to that desire for all natural products. You take your advertising campaign to emphasize that you use natural, organic, non GMO food products with the bare minimum ingredients necessary. You push that your food is healthy and simple, encouraging parents to be more inclined to buy simply because they know that they can read all of the ingredients on the label. Effectively then, when you want to use loaded language, you are appealing to emotion. You are making someone feel like they are making the right choice in deciding to go with whatever you are requesting that they use. This means that you are better able to get people to see things your way and better able to persuade simply because you know how to activate emotions. You will always choose the loaded language that will activate the feelings that you need present to play upon. Anchor Biases An anchor bias is a cognitive bias that ends up being incredibly influential. Effectively, you want to make something seem like a good idea or plan simply by making it seem reasonable in comparison to the anchor point. When you do this, you are generally setting an anchor point that you use to be a reference point for whatever you are trying to persuade someone else to do. This is best understood when looking at the negotiation of pay. You may be asking for a raise during your next review at work. Perhaps you want a 10% raise because of the productivity you have put in and the rate at which you are able to retain valuable clients. You figure out exactly why and how you want to argue for this particular number, but all that is left is the delivery of the argument. You need to present your information in a way that makes it seem realistic or reasonable. In a negotiation, it is common knowledge that you rarely ever take the first offer—you are usually able to counter offer, and then meet somewhere in the middle. This means that if you ask for that flat 10% raise right off the bat, your chances of actually getting it are slim. However, if you are able to make an anchor point that makes that 10% raise seem reasonable, you may actually stand a chance. The best way to do this is to always ask for more. You may go in and ask for a 15 or 20% raise instead, knowing that the number will be cut down. When you ask your boss for that raise, you will likely be shot down immediately, followed by a counteroffer of 5 10% simply because your original asking price was so high. This means that the other party is going to feel more inclined to give what you initially wanted since it is still significantly less than you originally asked for. In the end, you get your 10% raise, all by asking for far more than you were actually interested in. By shooting high right away, you make anything that comes afterward seem reasonable. You see this during sales pricing as well. Several different stores have pricing strategies that involve marking up prices only to discount them back to market value. This means that you see that you are getting a 20 30% discount, but only because the prices were inflated 20 30% in the first place. At the end of the day, you are paying market value, but you feel better about it because the anchor point of full price seemed like far more. Ask First What You Can Do for the Other Person Perhaps one of the simplest techniques that you can use to persuade someone to do something for you is to appeal to reciprocity. People naturally feel inclined to return favors when they have received them in the first place, and you can use this tendency in order to influence other people to do whatever it is that you want or need them to do. You may be able to convince someone to take a shift for you at work just by covering their extended lunch break, for example. This is a popular technique for the emotionally intelligent leaders. They make themselves sound entirely focused on making someone else feel better about doing a favor by offering to do one first. You may find that you have a friend that is always happy to help you or is the first to volunteer when you voice that you have a problem. Emotionally intelligent leaders make it a point to do this simply because it sets up a standard of camaraderie—you make it clear that you are interested in the other person simply by volunteering occasionally to help them out. Not everyone is willing to help out when asked or needed, but if you are willing to do so, even occasionally, other people will be more inclined to help you out when you need a favor. After having offered, you will then know that the individual that you have helped will be more inclined to help you in the future as well. For example, imagine that you know that you have a vacation coming up, and you do not want to board your dog. You also know that you have a friend that will be going on a trip just a week or so before you and your friend has cats. You may volunteer to go and check on the cats several times during your friend’s trip when your friend talks about having to look for someone to come in and take care of them. They will need litter cleaned a few times and will need daily food and water, but beyond that, they will be fine on their own. Your friend graciously accepts and then asks you to let her know if you will need any help in the near future. You reply that you actually will need help soon and that you need someone to take care of your dog. Your friend volunteers to keep the dog at her house for a few days while you are on your trip, and you no longer have to worry about boarding your dog because you know that your dog will be safe and happy with your friend. This technique tends to be better for those who need help from a friend or someone that they know personally just because it involves one on one interaction. However, you can also see this play out on a larger scale as well. Perhaps you are a manager, and your employees are all asking for an increase in pay across the board. You take it to your higher ups, and in return, your employees all see that you have their back. They then make it a point to always help whenever they are asked to do so and they are willing to go above and beyond when requested. To take advantage of this technique, you are best served by always asking how you can help other people whenever it is not a strain on you or what you need to do. If you are able to always ask other people what they want or need, you can make sure that you are setting up good relationships with other people, and with that good relationship established, you will be far more able to get them to do whatever it is that you needed. Chapter 6: What is NLP? Have you ever gone through the effort of trying to communicate with someone else that does not speak the same language as you? Perhaps you speak English, and the other person speaks Chinese. The person speaking Chinese is desperately gesturing for something, but you are entirely unsure what it is that they need. They gesture frantically, but you never figure it out. You make many guesses—you offer a phone, and they shake their head. You offer water, and they shake their head. No matter what you offer, the other person becomes more and more annoyed or frustrated because he or she cannot get through to you. Eventually, the other person storms off without having ever gotten whatever it is that he needed and you are left wondering what it was that was so desperately needed in the first place. Now, imagine that same exchange, but you are both the English and Chinese speaker—one half of you only speaks in English while the other desperately tries to communicate in Chinese. Neither side is able to communicate with the other, and both end up disjointed, frustrated, and without any proper communication. This is actually what does happen in your mind. Your conscious mind thinks in one way, and the unconscious mind thinks entirely differently. You may want to be setting up a life to be happy and successful, but in reality, your unconscious has never received the message. As a result, you find that your unconscious continuously sabotages you. Your emotions do not line up with your goals. Your body language does not fit. You simply run into complication after complication, despite the fact that you know what you want. Keep in mind that your unconscious mind is not meant to be your adversary. It is not something that needs to be tamed or controlled. Rather, it is something to harness and work within tandem. However, this means that you need to learn to communicate with it appropriately. If you can figure out the right way to communicate with that unconscious part of yourself, you can get it lined up with your conscious desires and expectations. You can get it to help you achieve your goals. It is not a matter of your unconscious being out to get you or subvert your attempts to happiness; it is a matter of you do not know how best to communicate with your unconscious mind to get what you want. Neuro Linguistic Programming This is where neuro linguistic programming comes in. NLP is designed to help you facilitate getting the results that you want and need. It helps you figure out how best to act in ways that are conducive to your success. Those who practice NLP say that the unconscious mind is what drives you to achieve your goals, so long as you are able to communicate those goals effectively. NLP recognizes that both the conscious and unconscious minds are important and serve their own roles. The Unconscious The Conscious Mind Mind The goal getter The goal setter Figures out how to achieve goals and Decides what is Spurs action toward desired understood desires NLP helps to bridge that gap between the two, acting as a sort of translator, so your conscious desires are communicated to the unconscious mind in order to ensure that your mind works together rather than against each other. By working together, you will find that you are far more likely to see your desired results simply because you are not running into the problem of having the two parts of your mind clash. Effectively, neuro linguistic processing is a method of learning to communicate with the unconscious. You are learning to become fluent in your unconscious mind’s method of communication so you can finally tell it what you want. It allows for that communication with yourself, but also facilitates the communication with others as well. This means that you can use the processes learned during the practice of NLP to also communicate with the unconscious minds of others as well. You can implant thoughts, facilitate behaviors, and encourage changes in lifestyles all by learning how to tap into the unconscious minds of others. While this may sound manipulative, you actually see people paying others to give them the NLP treatment. People will pay practitioners to help them overcome phobias or bad habits. People can be taught to overcome emotions, create new coping methods, and more all by interacting with someone fluent in NLP. For example, imagine that you have severe anxiety because, as a child, you went up to present something, but you really needed to use the bathroom. You could not go before the presentation, and as you gave it, you accidentally had an accident. Everyone laughed at you, and ever since, you have been terrified of ever getting involved in presentations. Being in front of a crowd became something that you could not possibly bring yourself to do. You failed several assignments all through school because you simply would refuse to present. You would do the work, but you would not go up to present it. Obviously, there are plenty of job choices during which you would never have to be in front of a crowd, but if you happened to choose a job that would regularly put you in front of people to deliver reports, you may find that you struggle. You know that you are not a child anymore and that realistically, you would not be wetting yourself again any time soon, but you cannot get over that feeling of being laughed at and horrified. As a solution, you may have spoken to an NLP practitioner. The practitioner would have access to several tools that could help you process that trauma in order to get past it. You could reframe the situation, learning to laugh at it instead of feeling traumatized. You could learn to create anchors that will have you begin to feel an entirely different feeling when you go up to present. No matter the method, there are several tools that can be used to help you get over that trauma. This is just one example of a time that NLP can be used to benefit. However, it can also be used in ways that are harmful. Manipulators love the tools of NLP because they grant access to the unconscious mind. The manipulator can use NLP techniques to create tendencies to obey almost mindlessly. They can create tendencies to give the manipulator exactly what he or she wants. The manipulator will be able to communicate with the unconscious mind without ever tripping the alarms of the conscious mind. Effectively, the manipulator is able to completely bypass the conscious and tell the unconscious exactly what is expected—and the unconscious will comply. Without any clear way to communicate, the individual will be left frustrated, wondering why they keep behaving the way that they are with no clear answer. The Keys to NLP For NLP to be effective, there are a few steps that need to be followed. These are the keys to NLP that will help you figure out how to access the mind. At this point, you are being shown a brief overview of what needs to happen. There are techniques that will more or less use these steps on their own and other steps that will seek to change things up a bit. However, at the heart of things, these must happen. These three steps, the keys to being able to practice NLP, are being able to examine and identify beliefs, choosing an appropriate anchor, and then setting that anchor in an efficient manner. Set the anchor If you can master these three simple steps, you will find that the more Identify and examine beliefs Choose an anchor specific techniques seem to fall into place with ease. You will be able to convince people to do almost anything, simply by knowing how to get into the other person’s mind. This is a strategic endeavor, but once you are able to follow that strategy, you will find that the control that you can exert over both yourself and others around you is far more than you had access to ever before. You will become the master over your own behavior, while also having the power and access to other people to be a master over them as well. You can effectively use these NLP techniques and strategies to figure out how best to win the long game. Examine beliefs First, you are figuring out the information at hand. This is where you start to piece together what you or the other person think or feel surrounding a certain event or situation. You may find that the other person is highly anxious about socializing and being in front of crowds. When in front of a crowd, they tend to melt down and freak out. You know this and acknowledge it. You will be examining beliefs to figure out why that is felt. In this case, it may link back to that one incident of wetting herself in front of a crowd and then being mortified any time she is under public scrutiny. If you are attempting to use NLP on yourself, which is a valid technique that many people will use, you may take this time to identify the emotion that you have that you wish was not problematic. You may figure out that you tend to feel angry during certain situations, and because of that anger, you struggle to really communicate with other people effectively. That lack of communication usually has the unfortunate result of causing problems in your relationships. As you identify those feelings, you will find that you can figure out where the problem lies. In figuring them out, you can start to figure out how best to target and destroy them. In NLP, this process usually involves the use of anchors—points that are directly related to a certain event or feeling. An anchor for your stress, for example, maybe you bite your nails out of habit, but after a lifetime of biting your nails when stress, just the act of absently biting your nails can make your anxiety begin to flare up. Choose an anchor Knowing that you will be under the influence of several anchors already, certain situations or actions that cause you to feel a certain emotion, it is time to figure out which anchors and emotions you can use to overcome the problem. If you know that you have an anger issue, you may go through the effort of learning how to combat that anger issue through triggering new emotions instead. Whenever you would feel yourself getting angry, then you would make sure that you trigger your anchor, and that would then cause you to feel something else. Effectively, if you are familiar with basic psychology, you are conditioning yourself. You are effectively training yourself to act a certain way in response to certain situations, and in doing so, you are able to make sure that you can overcome the negative feelings that have been holding you down. If you have bad habits in relation to your emotions, you can begin to counter them. You can figure out how to create new, healthier habits that trigger you to behave in new, healthier ways. You can figure out how best to protect yourself from your negative emotions so you can heal and move on in life. Your new anchor can be just about anything. You could use an affirmation or word that you repeat to yourself to help keep yourself under control. It could be a movement or an action that you use to remind yourself to stay under control, such as snapping your wrist with a rubber band whenever you find that your anger is getting out of hand. It could be a scent that makes you feel secure. It can even be a certain thought or memory that you return to during times of distress. When you choose an anchor, you want to make sure that it is something that you can regularly access for maximum impact. You may be best served with a short phrase that you use or a motion of your hands. That is something that you can do subtly and at any point in time. Set an anchor Finally, you must figure out how to set your anchor. This is where you see the most deviation in your behaviors and techniques. There are several different methods that can be used in order to set a good anchor point for you or for those around you, and how you decide to do so will largely be dependent upon what you are hoping to do and how you are dealing with. You may choose to use visualization if you are working with someone intentionally, with the other person knowing what you are doing. You may choose to use something more along the lines of mirroring and subtle mimicry and emotional triggers if you want to be entirely unnoticed. You may choose to do something like intentionally reframing a memory from negative and traumatic into something funny if you want to change your own way of thinking and your own emotional reaction. Ultimately, the method that you choose will largely be subject to who you are attempting to persuade and how you want to go about it. If you want to make it a point to, for example, persuade a stranger to buy something that you want them to, you may make it a point to trigger a mirroring relationship—do not worry if you do not know how to do this. It will be discussed in Chapter 8. From there, you can subtly influence him to nod his head by nodding your own head, making the other person’s mindset far more likely to be agreeable, and leading to the other person being influenced to nod along with you without ever realizing that you had influenced and encouraged that decision. Whether you want to control yourself or someone else, you always want to choose an anchor that is simple and easily implemented, but not so common that it will be randomly triggered by strangers during the course of the day. While you probably could trigger someone to make a certain face every time you do a very specific and common movement, such as giving a thumbs up, it would not be particularly kind or ethical to do so. You would be triggering the other person in a way that will likely be distracting and problematic. After all, no one wants to be grimaced at every time they give a thumbs up to someone else. The History of NLP NLP, like nearly any psychological technique, has changed drastically from creation to what you now know and see today. While the root is still the same, there are different ways that the thoughts and techniques are approached now compared to what was seen back when it was first founded in the 1970s. This chapter will provide you with a brief overview of how NLP has changed and what you can expect if you were to use NLP today. Ultimately, you can think of NLP as what it was during creation and within the four waves of NLP. The Creation of NLP Created in 1972 by two psychotherapists named Richard Bandler and John Grinder, this process was originally designed to model several other therapeutic processes at the time. In particular, it referenced and developed from techniques such as gestalt therapy, hypnotherapy, and systemic family therapy. All of these came together to create an approach that would address two specific things: Why are psychotherapists special or skilled in influencing others? How can that specialty be transferred to other normal people without any formal training in psychology? These two thoughts then triggered the beginning of the development of NLP. IN particular, people were taught to look at each of the aforementioned psychotherapy processes. Bandler and Grinder drew from those different forms of psychotherapy and pulled out any processes or techniques that they thought were critical in making the therapist so powerful. They identified the patters in communication and attitudes and were able to then create and build a list of techniques and beliefs drawing from those forms of psychotherapy. Thus, NLP was born. NLP as primarily existed within four specific waves, during which different aspects were focused on or developed. These four waves are important to understand in order to truly understand what NLP was and what it has become. e Wave 1: NLPure: In the first wave of NLP, you see the original NLP as developed by Bandler and Grinder. This is the purest form, during which success and enthusiasm were the most important factors that were pushed. e Wave 2: NLPt: In the second wave, you see NLP used as an application in psychotherapy. It is commonly referred to as neuro linguistic psychotherapy, and it began in 1989. This was all about making sure that people had a healthy and happy approach and view of life. e Wave 3: NLPeace: This third wave, NLPeace, arose in 1992, with a focus on spirituality. Instead of focusing on how to fix the mind itself, it was focusing on how to find meaning in life and figure out how to connect spiritually. e Wave 4: NLPsy: Finally, the fourth wave encompasses the use of neuro linguistic processing as a form of psychology. Beginning in 2006, this was used to being to identify psychological patterns. It requires a master’s degree in psychology, for a qualification to practice psychotherapy, and also an NLP master training qualification. Effectively, when you see someone that practices NLPsy, you know that they have gone through years of schooling in order to be as effective as possible when it comes to offering treatment. When you seek out NLP treatment from a professional, you will likely face someone that is trained in fourth wave NLP. This is good—they are licensed to help you and can enable you to be the healthiest you that you can be. However, remember that NLP itself was designed to be accessible even to the average person. While you are not qualified to diagnose people if you have not gone to school to become licensed to do so, you will still be able to develop an affinity for several NLP processes so you can use them effectively and in ways that you know are beneficial to others around you or to yourself. Chapter 7: NLP Basic Principles to Improve Life Before really delving into the processes of NLP and how you can utilize them, it is important to recognize that there are several principles that you will have to keep in mind. When you want to use NLP, you must meet these principles if you want to be able to be successful. After all, accessing other people’s unconscious minds will require you to be patient, flexible, and willing to spend the time to do so effectively. You will need to have a clear plan ready for yourself so you can actively address and live by the rules that you are seeking to make use of. Think of these as your guiding processes that will help you to make sure that you are able to use NLP. These will be your founding principles that you will live by if you want to be able to tap into the unconscious. These will guide you in being successful, whether you want to improve your own life or convince someone else to do something specific. No matter what you choose to do, you will be able to do so, if you keep these steps in mind. In particular, the steps that will be addressed here are being able to know your outcome, take action, maintain sensory acuity, have flexibility, and live by a physiology of excellence. With these five principles, NLP will be successful for you. This chapter will guide you through learning how to utilize these principles in your own life. You will be able to help yourself. You will be able to help others. Above all, you will be able to be effective and successful. Know your outcome The first and most important place to start when you are attempting to live with the utilization of NLP is knowing your outcome. This is effectively figuring out exactly what you want, how you will get it, and why you want it. If you do not know what the outcome you want is, how can you possibly hope to ever achieve it? If you do not know that you want to be a lawyer, for example, can you possibly reasonably expect yourself to go through law school and build up all that debt, only to find out after the fact that law was your passion after all? No—no one in their right mind would ever put themselves through law school without ever knowing that they wanted to be a lawyer or that their true goal in life was to be a lawyer. People may go through law school because they have been told their whole life that they should go to law school, but even those people grew up with the expectation of being a lawyer. No one goes to law school without the expectation or desire to become that person. Just like no one would ever expect that you must know your own outcome and desires if you want to succeed. You need to figure out exactly what you want in life so you can figure out how to get it. Do you want to be rich? Do you want to find love? Maybe you want to be a parent, or you want to become a firefighter. No matter what the dream is, you need to know and vocalize it to yourself if you want it to become a reality. If you want to be rich, you can tell yourself that. If you want to be happy, you can tell yourself that, too. What your goal is in life is not as important as knowing what that goal is. That knowledge is power and will help you during your process. If you are using NLP for other people, you may want to know what your end goal for that person is. Do you want them to be happy? Do you want them to buy that car you are selling? Maybe you want them to break up with their narcissistic partner. No matter what it is you want, you need to know what it is if you hope to make it happen. Once you know what you want, it is time to form it in a way that you can act upon it. This is effectively just coming up with a way to structure your desires so you can act upon them. When you do this, you must meet certain specific criteria to ensure that the outcome is well formed. This is a fancy way of saying that if you want your goal to be actionable and attainable, you need to word it in the proper manner. These criteria are critical to making sure that you are able to act accordingly. These criteria are: e Positive oriented: Your goal must be focused on what you do want, not what you would like to avoid. For example, you must state that you want to find love, versus you don’t want to be alone any longer. Shifting this to a positive instead of a negative gives you something to work toward instead of something to avoid. e Sensory specific: As we continue along the NLP path, you will begin to see that every method of influence on someone else, whether it is on yourself or on someone else, is sensory. You must figure out which senses you will be targeting and how those senses will perceive when you have been successful at achieving your goal. Perhaps this will be that you can see that you have a partner if your end goal is to find love. If you want to sell that car, perhaps you decide that the sensory input will be having the paperwork with the signatures in your hand. Try to address how each of your five senses will interact with the outcome when it has been achieved. This helps you be able to truly visualize what you want. Contextual: This involves making sure that you know the context under which you will be successful. You are acknowledging what has to happen if you want to be successful. Where will it happen? When? How? Who will you be with? When you know the context of what you are seeking, you will be able to acknowledge what you need to do to set up the environment properly to ensure that you do happen to get whatever you are hoping to achieve. Self achievable: You must make sure that the goal you want is one that you can set into action on your own without the influence of other people. You may need to make sure that other people are doing something, but can you do so? You must have access to the resources that you will need to achieve your goal. Ecological: This is as simple as asking three specific questions for yourself: Is it good for you? Is it good for other people? Is it for the greater good? Remember, NLP is all about bettering the world and those who are using it. While it is often used as a tool for manipulation and controlling others, that is not always the intention. Worthwhile: Finally, you must make sure that whatever the outcome that you are trying to achieve is worthwhile. Is it something that will actually be useful and positive to you? It does not have to be useful on a daily basis, but you should be able to see some good from whatever it is. You may have enhanced other people’s lives, allowing your friend to no longer be terrified of crowds, which indirectly improves your own life because your friend is happier and healthier. On the other hand, you may directly address a problem of your own in an attempt to better yourself, and that is okay too. So long as it is effective, either directly or indirectly, it is good enough. Take action The next step to making sure that you are able to be successful in using NLP is to take action. This is something that may seem like common sense, but many people entirely miss this step altogether. You must be willing to act if you hope to see any results. If you want to ensure that you can actually change your life or change the behaviors of someone else, you must figure out reasons to work or do something. Oftentimes, people fall into the trap Of inaction—they feel like they cannot possibly succeed, and therefore they fall victim to procrastination. However, this is your mind’s attempt to avoid action in order to protect yourself from failure. When you protect yourself in this way, it is easy to make excuses and act like it happened for a reason you may tell yourself that you are too dumb to really make a difference, or that you will fail even if you try. Well, guess what: Failure happens. People fail all the time, but that is not inherently bad. When you fail, you learn. When you learn, you become better prepared for your next attempt. It is okay to fail, so long as you learn from that failure and do not let it define you. Effectively, then, you want to live through learning from that failure and not letting the fear of failure keep you locked in inaction. When you are practicing NLP, you must act. If you refuse to act, nothing gets done. Nothing changes. People’s behaviors remain the same. You fail. NLP is not passive—it requires constant action and effort, and for that reason, you must be willing to go through the motions and make whatever it is that you want happen. Sensory acuity Next, you must learn sensory acuity. This is effectively learning to cue into all of the important body language that you will need to understand if you hope to be able to use NLP. NLP is all about being able to look at someone else, understand their mindset and processes, and then use those processes in order to figure out how to influence the other person’s mind as well. Stop and consider for a moment what body language is—it is unconscious movements that are designed to convey very specific meanings. Your unconscious mind is largely responsible for your body language—if you are anxious, your body language will convey that. If you are happy, your body language will convey that. This means that if you learn how to read the body language of someone else, you will be able to read the state of their unconscious mind. This is because body language and actions are directly influenced by thoughts. They exist within a cycle—thoughts influence feelings and those feelings influence behavior. Effectively, then, you can learn to track the thoughts by learning to identify behavior. You can also take this one step further by learning to change thoughts by influencing behavior as well. Thoughts <= Effectively, then, sensory acuity is the ability to focus entirely externally. Think about what happens most of the time when someone is telling you a story. If you are not trained in effective listening, you may make it a point to constantly be coming up with arguments that you can use to make a certain point in response. You may feel like you are listening, but in reality, your mind is also busy trying to come up with some sort of reaction or counterargument. This is problematic—you are not paying close enough attention to the other party, and you run some serious risks in doing so. However, you can learn to defeat this. You can learn to focus entirely on listening instead. When you focus on sensory acuity, focusing on what the other person is doing as they talk, you are paying complete attention. You see all of those minute shifts in body language. You are seeing the other person change up what they are doing in response to you. You are seeing those subtle signs that may betray a lie, or that say that the other person is uncomfortable with the line of questioning but is desperate to try to remain open in communication. Effectively, then, you must learn to always listen attentively. You must learn how to recognize these aspects of body language so you can use them as feedback for yourself. In learning to recognize that body language, you can effectively allow yourself to respond appropriately, or to glean all of that information that you will need in order to be successful with the attempts to persuade with NLP. Behavioral Flexibility Another important aspect of NLP is flexibility. NLP is not an exact science simply because no two people are the same. People are complex, and so too are their minds. One person may be entirely comfortable with talking about a personal issue while the other is terrified to mention similar issues. You may find that some people are happy to comply without resistance, and others are completely unresponsive to your best attempts to influence. Because no two minds are the same, you must be willing to engage in a little trial and error. You cannot simply decide that you will come up with a one size fits all approach to accessing other people’s minds—you must be willing to entertain several different possibilities and to change things up when you hit a roadblock. Oftentimes, people fail at this—they simply stubbornly refuse to ever engage in anything other than what they have originally set out to do, but the results never change. If it failed the first and second time, why do you think that the same attempt would pass the next time? If you never try anything different, the change will never arrive. You need to be able to focus on change if you want to be successful at NLP. You need to be flexible in your own behaviors. You need to be flexible in what you are willing to try. This helps beyond just learning NLP, too—when you use this, you are effectively making yourself more flexible in general. You are teaching yourself to cope with failure or the unexpected with ease. You will no longer be afraid of failing or feeling like you cannot try anything else. It helps you become more likely to succeed simply because you are willing to step out of your comfort zone and mix things up when you need to. If you are unwilling to make concessions or change your best attempts at dealing with a situation, all you are going to do is keep yourself stubbornly rooted in failure and control rather than looking at things as being a chance for improvement. Physiology of excellence Finally, if you want to be successful in your endeavors with NLP, you must be able to operate from a position of health. You need to be feeling physically and mentally sound if you hope to operate at your best, which means that you must be able to take care of yourself. You cannot take care of others if you cannot take care of yourself, so you must be willing to maintain that physiology of excellence. Just as you are told that you must put your own oxygen mask on before tending to your children on an airplane, you must be willing to take care of yourself before you are willing to take on the world’s problems. You need to ensure that you are healthy. This means that you must engage in self care. You must make sure that you are healthy. You must make sure that you get the proper rest to maintain yourself. In particular, if you find that your life is not giving you the excellence that you need or that you are not as healthy as you could be, you should put in the time to achieve it. You may need to use some of your own NLP techniques to achieve this, such as teaching yourself to be more diligent about your own sleep or exercise regimen or reminding yourself to eat healthily. However, you owe it to yourself and to those around you that are relying on you to keep yourself healthy. After all, you cannot possibly focus on the other person if you are not feeling well. Besides just being in your own best interest, if you are able to make sure that you are healthy, you will rub off on those that you are with. If you adopt your own healthy lifestyle, those closest to you are more likely to begin to adapt some of those tendencies for themselves as well. Chapter 8: Mind Control with NLP With that understanding of what NLP is and how it can influence you, it is time to begin understanding some of the most common techniques that you can use to control the minds of others. You may choose to control your own mind, influencing your unconscious to behave accordingly to ensure that you can get what you need, or you may be influencing other people to help them instead. No matter who you are attempting to influence, you will be able to do so with these techniques. Keep in mind that some of these may require tweaking between using it for yourself and using it for someone else. As you read through this chapter, you will be introduced to NLP and mind control—you will understand why it works at all. You will be shown how NLP works in order to help control other people. From there, you will then begin to learn how to exact that control over other people as well. You will be guided through four distinct tactics that you can use that wield NLP as a tool in order to influence others. As always, remember that NLP is one of those tools whose value and intent chan entirely change the meaning. If you use NLP from a position of wanting to help others, it is incredibly effective. However, if you want to use it in order to manipulate or hurt others, you will find that you can do far more harm than you may have realized. Keep in mind that playing inside someone else’s mind, no matter what your intention, is something dangerous. It is not something to take lightly or simply do to mess with someone. You should be very deliberate in your acts of controlling others. Free will and someone else’s mind are very personal and private, and that privacy deserves to be respected. NLP to Control Minds Ultimately, NLP is one of the most effective ways to influence someone else's mind. While you will not be able to simply tell someone to do something and get them to do just that or to use someone else’s mind with your own controller to gain absolute control, you are able to heavily influence what someone is willing to do or what they are willing to say or put up with, all by learning to access their minds and prime them to do what you want. You will effectively be able to plant thoughts into their minds, having them fit perfectly and neatly as if they were always intended to be there. a Effectively, then, this is an incredibly powerful influence—it will enable you to get other people to do almost anything that you want them to do if you know what you are doing. You can dispel anxiety, or you can use it to instill fear for a tighter grip over someone. You can use it to free someone from stress or to make them feel entirely powerless. This is because you are accessing the unconscious mind. NLP is effectively a form of hypnosis—you are gently and covertly lulling the other person into a state of suggestiveness, during which you can bypass the conscious mind in order to install your own desires into someone else. You can make sure that the other person is willing to think or feel whatever it is that you want them to do just by making sure that you know what you are doing. In fact, people have used these techniques to convince people to do nearly anything. All you need to be able to do is lull them into a state of relaxation and trust. In fact, one of the most important parts of being able to install a sense of trust in you. This is known as establishing a rapport with the other person, and if you can do that, you can effectively gain access to the other person’s mind. Ultimately, when someone trusts you, they will not be actively guarding against you or what you might do. This is why developing that rapport is so critical in NLP. When someone practices NLP, they usually spend a period of time building up that rapport so they will be able to tap into the other person’s unconscious mind. You will be able to do this yourself if you are willing to put in the effort. Mirroring First and foremost, you must build up rapport, as mentioned. The best way to do so is through learning to mirror someone. Mirroring is the unconscious mimicking of people that we are close to. Think about how, when one person yawns, their friends or family member that are present are likely to yawn as well—that is a form of mirroring. However, it does not stop there. When two people are close to each other emotionally and truly trust each other, you will find that their breathing rates will synchronize. They will walk together with the same steps and pacing. They will naturally take sips at the same time, or take bites at the same time if they are eating together. They will make the same motions as one another—if one itches their nose, the other will likely itch theirs as well. They may even take the same poses as each other without thinking about it. This is mirroring, and it is incredibly telling. When someone is mirroring someone else, it is because they are able to recognize that they like or trust that other person—that rapport has been built up and is being honored. If you mirror someone else around you, you are likely to do so because you feel like you can trust them. However, this can take a lot of time to build up naturally. Unless you have happened to have an instant connection with the other person, you are likely to need to go through the process of building it yourself. You can do this with just a few simple steps. Create a Follow Find the connection verbal cues punctuator First, you must build up a connection with the other person. You can do this by making sure that you are looking directly at them—you want to be making eye contact and directly acknowledging the other person. You may make it a point to pick up on their own subtle cues—try to synchronize your breathing with the other person as well. As you listen to them, you want to make it a point to nod your head regularly—in particular, you want to do the triple nod. The triple nod tells the other person three things: You are listening, you understand, and most importantly, you agree. You should feel the relationship build up naturally at this point. Next, you want to pick up on the other person’s verbal cues. While you could begin by mimicking their body language, that tends to ring more alarm bells than simply picking up on speech patterns. You will want to make sure that you are talking at the same pitch as the other person and actively following their pace and enthusiasm. As you do so, you will find that the other person will continue longer, especially if you acknowledge them with the triple nod. Finally, the last step in developing that mirroring connection is through finding their punctuator. Everyone has one—it may be as simple as a waggle of the eyebrows when you want to emphasize something. It may be more complex, such as pumping a fist in the air or tilting the head and smiling when you say something that you want emphasized. Nevertheless, identifying this will require some active work on your end. You must be willing to put in the effort to watch the other person’s reactions and tendencies in order to figure out what their own punctuator is. You want to know what they do so you can mimic it yourself. When you figure out their punctuator, you want to use it back the next time you feel like they are likely to use it. If you feel like they are gearing up to waggle their brows at you, do it first. They may not notice it, but they likely will smile and continue to engage with you. They will feel an instant connection to you without truly understanding why, and that is okay. Now, all you need to do is test the connection. You can do this simply by brushing your own shoulder or actively doing something else in an attempt to see if they are willing to copy you. You want to make sure that whatever you choose to do is relatively subtle and that it will not seem out of place, but it also has to be something that you think would not be coincidental. If they follow along, you know that you have done your job well, and you can move on. If not, go back to the beginning and try again. Sometimes, it takes a while to really convince someone to trust you. Anchoring Once you have built a connection with someone else, you are ready to move on to actually attempting to alter the mind of someone else. One of the best ways to do this is through anchoring—when you are anchoring someone to something, you are setting them up to have a specific reaction to a very specific stimulus. This may be that you want them to actively change their mood when you do something, or you want to figure out a way to make them do something in particular in response to their own anxiety or negative feeling. You can use this to make someone more likely to choose a positive decision when they feel out of control, or you can do so in order to get them to do something specific for you. A common tactic of manipulators, for example, is to create a trigger to fear from a very small anchor that is unnoticeable to most—they may use a slight but distinct movement of the hand in order to make the other person feel fear in order to keep the other person under control. However, it can also be sued to prevent bad habits, such as smoking or drinking, or to be a way to cope with anxiety at the moment. Anchoring is quite simple once you are able to develop a rapport with someone else. All you need to do is figure out the right steps and the right feelings to anchor. There are five simple steps to getting someone else anchored to a feeling. Keep in mind that these will take time—you cannot simply expect someone to randomly anchor without much effort. You are effectively conditioning someone, likely without them even being aware of it, and that takes effort and energy to remain undetected. Without further ado, let’s take a look at the five steps of anchoring someone else. ZED E29 XD AD TED Step 1: Choose a feeling You will start this process by figuring out what feeling you wish to instill in someone else. For the purpose of this process, let’s say you want to make your partner feel more confident, so she is not afraid to ask for what she needs when she needs it. You know that she struggles with this and you want to change it. Of course, this feeling could be anything. You could choose to instill anxiety or relaxation. You could choose happiness or sadness. Ultimately, you need to find a trigger that works for you and your situation. Step 2: Choose a trigger This is a fancy way of telling you to figure out a way to install that particular feeling to the other person. You may use storytelling for someone else, telling them a time that brings back feelings of that particular feeling that you want to install. If you want your partner to feel confident, you may reminisce over a period of time during which she was quite confident, describing it until you can see that she seems to be reliving that feeling. Step 3: Choose an anchor Next, you must identify the anchor that you will use. This can use touch, sight, smell, taste, or sound. Most often, sight is the easiest one to instill in someone else, but it still requires enough proximity that you can trigger it when you need it. Figure out what works best for you and the other person. Perhaps, in this case, you choose that you will use a touch to one specific point inside the wrist that is not commonly touched. Step 4: Trigger the feeling At this point, you will be actively triggering the feeling that you are anchoring. You may tell the story during which your partner was confident. You may say things that will help boost your partner’s confidence, such as offering lavish praise for the dinner that was prepared, or pointing out how beautiful she looks that day. You want her to feel confident, so you can then link it to the anchor. You may make it a point to do this several different ways several different times throughout the day. Step 5: Link the anchor Finally, when you can see that the other person is feeling the emotion that you are trying to anchor, you can begin to use the anchor that you want. If you have chosen that quick touch to the inside of your partner’s wrist, you will touch it then. If you have chosen a facial expression, you may make it. As you do this, over time, you will find that your partner makes an association between her confidence and whatever it is that you are anchoring. The trick here is to make sure that any time you trigger that feeling for her, you must pair it with the anchor as well. This is critical if you want it to truly be effective. Keep in mind that this will take time, but it will also be incredibly effective. Pacing and Leading Commonly used in NLP is the act of pacing and leading. Effectively, this is the ability to figure out how best to identify with the other person (such as mirroring to get on the same page) and then guiding them into your own mindset instead of allowing them to maintain their own. As you read this, going over the words written here for you, you may find that you are growing curious about what pacing and leading is and how it can be used. If you now feel curious about pacing and leading, then you have just fallen for it—your current state was acknowledged, and then you were gently guided to a different state—curiosity. This is an incredibly effective technique for one specific reason: You start by mentioning something that is true, acknowledging the state of someone else before actively mentioning something else. It effectively disarms the conscious mind immediately after telling the truth—the conscious no longer sees what is about to be said as potentially threatening because the first part was not. Sometimes, this can be quite overt, as it was in that first reaction, but you can also see it happen far subtler as well. As long as you are able to match the pace and then lead, you will find that this technique can be successful. Of course, you must have that initial rapport built up—if you do not already have a rapport with whomever you are attempting to pace, start with mirroring and then move on to this technique. Change that t he Establish rapport heal aie pace to lead the p P other person Consider for a moment that you are in an argument with your spouse. Your spouse is getting quite angry, and his voice is rising. You are also quite angry but you do not want it to escalate any further. In this instance then, you may make it a point to match the other person’s pace. This does not mean that you should start yelling at your spouse. You need to find another way to match pace. Instead of also yelling out your frustrations, perhaps you return that same pitch and intensity with something slightly less serious. You yell back that you are hungry instead of yelling back that you are angry. Maybe you even mix it up and yell that you are hangry instead. You then start to gradually lessen your own intensity, taking them and their own intensity with you. The sudden change in pace may initially shock your spouse, but you should find that your spouse will follow along with your de escalation most of the time. This can be incredibly useful in many different settings—you may use it in a business setting, listening to what your client has to say, matching pace, and then leading into what you would like to discuss instead. You can use this in advertising, acknowledging what people are doing, and then directing them to ordering the product. You can even use it to gain interest in something, as was done at the beginning of this section. Learning to Read Body Language Finally, one last technique that is regularly used in NLP is to learn how to read and wield body language. Spending the time to understand nonverbal communication means that you will be able to better read what other people are intending. In understanding the intents of other people, you will find that you can also influence and control situations far better as well. When you are able to read body language, you develop the ability to understand what they are thinking. However, when you learn to wield your own body language, you can begin to figure out how best to interact with other people in order to subtly change their own feelings. Think back to mirroring—the other person is likely to follow your lead when you are able to create that connection with them. What if you were to begin to use your own nonverbal cues to help calm them down or change their mindset during that? Maybe you are talking to someone who seems hesitant to make a purchase—you can mirror the other person and subtly nod your head in order to gently push them toward wanting to agree. You can use this to sort of push people into making their final decision. If the other person is still floundering about the idea after you have already attempted to push for a yes, you should probably accept that no and move on. You can use this in several other ways as well. If someone seems annoyed, you can mirror them to get your own rapport with the other person and then use body language to begin to calm them down as well. This is effectively an entirely physical version of the pace and lead, but it can be incredibly effective if you know what you are doing and make it a point to use it well. All you need to do is go through the process, and you will find that you can constantly influence even minor feelings. Chapter 9: Improving Communication Skills Considering just how social that NLP comes across with how much you must be able to interact with the minds of others, it should come as no surprise that good communication skills are critical if you want to be able to use it. These can be difficult to develop if you do not know what you are doing, but you can learn how best to develop the skills that will serve you well if you are willing to put in the effort. In particular, communication skills that are strong can provide you with a myriad of benefits, both within NLP and persuasion and just in your general life. You will be able to communicate with others to be understood better, meaning that you will not run into conflict as much. You will be able to cope with struggles that you may run into. You will be able to ask for what you need. You will be able to better communicate with the unconscious minds of those around you. All you need to do is develop the right skills to do so. It will up your own confidence, and with that improved confidence, you will find that you are much more likely to be happy in your life. In particular, when you need to develop solid communication skills, the best ones to learn are to be able to make meaningful eye contact without forcing or faking it, being able to present yourself as confident and in control, and being able to listen effectively. These, in particular, will help you become far better at being able to communicate in a way that not only facilitates your own understanding of what others want to convey to you but also to make sure that you can tell other people what you need in a clear and meaningful way. Effectively, you will be able to ensure that those around you understand you and are able to respect what you want and need. This chapter will provide you with the necessary information to address those three specific techniques referenced above, providing you with the steps to make these habitual, even if you find that you are intimidated by the idea of making eye contact or trying to be confident. Just keep in mind, whenever you feel doubtful about these methods, that you will be seen as more trustworthy, and that trust is critical if you hope to be seen as reliable by those around you. Making Eye Contact Eye contact is one of those skills that you need to develop to be effective at communicating, but it is also one that people tend to struggle with. Eye contact can make what you are saying more impactful and change how people view you as you speak, but it can also be quite difficult to maintain. If you want to be able to communicate clearly, you need to develop a tolerance for making eye contact, or at least learning how to make eye contact in a way that convinces the other party that you are looking at them. Because so many arguments and conflicts can be linked to a communication mistake, being able to communicate clearly and effectively is critical. With good eye contact and solid communication skills, you will find that people around you are far more willing to listen to what you have to say. They will trust you more frequently and more willingly. They will be more engaged in the conversation and exchange and be more likely to remember you fondly and happily. The beginning of this all is eye contact. After all, if someone does not make strong eye contact with you, you usually assume that they are untrustworthy— it is a sign of deception, and that is not what you want to be portraying if you want to be seen as honest and worthy of listening to. When you use eye contact, you are telling the other person that you are listening and interested. You tell the other person that, at that moment, your focus is on that other person, meaning that they are free to continue. However, people generally struggle with eye contact. If you want to better your ability to make meaningful eye contact, try to follow the following steps. The 50/70 rule At first glance, this may seem confusing since it does not add up to 100, but it actually makes sense. You are looking for eye contact that is good, meaningful, but not staring and uncomfortable. While we all want to receive eye contact to know that we matter and that the other party is actively listening, we also do not want too much eye contact. Too much feels aggressive and uncomfortable, and for that reason, you need to find that middle ground where you give enough eye contact to acknowledge but not so much that you are staring at the other person. This is managed by making eye contact 50% of the time when you speak, and 70% of the time when you are listening. When people speak, they naturally look away as they gather their thoughts. This is because thinking is incredibly difficult to manage. Eye contact is mentally intensive and exhausting, and for this reason, it can get distracting if you try to maintain it constantly during a conversation. By making eye contact half of the time when you speak, you tell the other person that you are talking to them without coming across as rude or challenging. When you are listening, however, you want to be seen as attentive to encourage the other person to keep talking. This is where the 70% rule comes in—you want to look at them more so they feel like they have your attention, but you still want to avoid any actual staring as people generally do not enjoy being stared at. It is distracting, uncomfortable, and can cause problems. Maintain 4 5 seconds of eye contact at a time When you are making that eye contact, make sure that you take a break every 4 or 5 seconds. Doing so breaks the eye contact enough to soften it up without appearing flighty or distracted. By breaking your eye contact every few seconds, you make it clear that you are not trying to be rude or aggressive, and by returning back to the speaker, you tell them that they still have your full attention. Pay attention to where you look When you are taking a break from eye contact, it can be easy to look down or look off quickly. This, however, tends to make you look nervous, and therefore not trustworthy. When you are breaking your eye contact, make it a point to look to the side rather than looking down. Veering off to the side or up and to the side implies thinking, but looking down makes you seem uncomfortable or shy. Immediate eye contact When you want to talk to someone, make sure that you get eye contact before you speak, and make sure that you meet eyes as you begin to speak. You want that eye contact present as the speaking begins. Establish your eye contact, talk, and then look away. Look between the eyes If you find that legitimate eye contact is too uncomfortable to maintain, you can try looking in between the eyes at the bridge of the nose instead. You can usually use this to fool the other person into thinking that you are looking at them, though you are saving yourself from the discomfort of eye contact. Of course, genuine eye contact is always preferred, but you can use this as a crutch while you work on establishing your eye contact more readily and regularly. Listening Effectively Along with making good eye contact, you must also be able to listen effectively if you hope to make good progress with people around you. Listening is another of those skills that many people take for granted—they feel like being able to listen to someone should be easy since we have a sense of hearing. All you need to do is hear, right? Wrong. Hearing is entirely different from listening. Hearing is passive, whereas listening is active. When you are hearing someone, you are simply registering that they are talking. You do not truly understand what is intended or being said, even if you are able to more or less summarize the point of what was said. When you hear someone, you are not necessarily listening to them, but when you are listening to someone, you hear them. Active listening is one of those skills that you can develop then to elevate your hearing to listening. In doing so, you will find that communication, in general, is greatly improved. If you can communicate and listen effectively, you will get a better understanding of what was intended by that conversation because you took the time to listen and inquire about it instead of just making assumptions. How to Listen Actively When you are ready to listen actively, you will have to go through several steps. You effectively want to ensure that you are in a position that is able to listen and pay attention. You want to avoid distractions. You want to give the other person your undivided attention. You want to really listen without contemplating how you will respond to the other person. This may sound simple in theory, but think about what your mind is doing during a conversation—do you find that you end up spending the time trying to figure out how to answer the last point made when the other person is still talking? That is not active listening. That is hearing the other person and then distractedly putting together a rebuttal that may be entirely irrelevant by the end of the conversation, and that is not fair to the other person. To listen actively, then, you will do the following: e Step 1: Face the other person: This is where you give them your undivided attention. No phones or screens present. You will make sure that you are making eye contact and undistracted. e Step 2: Listen: When you are listening, make sure that you are actively paying attention to what the other person is saying. You are not trying to come up with a response during this period—you are simply listening to the other person. e Step 3: Attentive body language: Remember how you would nod when trying to build rapport? That comes back here. Make sure that you nod and give affirmation that you are still listening as the other person talks, but do not interrupt. You also want to make sure that you lean in slightly as you listen to the other person and keep your own body language open and receptive as well. This means no crossing of the arms and paying attention effectively. e Step 4: Ask questions: When you get to the end of the other person’s speech, ask them a few questions. These should be clarifying questions, not questions designed to poke holes in the other person’s argument. Take the time to ask if you understood properly. e Step 5: Form your answer: Do not begin to formulate your response to the other person until you have gotten confirmation that you do, in fact, understand what was said. At that point, take a minute to put together a response, and then go ahead and give it. When you follow these steps, you will find that you are actually far better at understanding what people are saying than you initially thought. You will begin to get more insight from other people. Others will trust you more in conversation with them. They will be more inclined to listen to you as well, and you will be more prepared for your own NLP journey. Remember, if you want to be able to master NLP, you need to be able to listen effectively. Confident Body Language Finally, one last method that you can use to better your own communication with others is to develop confident body language. This means that you need to make sure that you do not close yourself off to contact other people. If you are quite conscientious about your body language, making sure that you portray yourself in a positive and attentive manner, you will find that you are actually far more effective in communicating with others. This section will provide you with several different ways that you can keep your body language effective and confident in order to convince others to show confidence in you as well. If you can attract confidence, you will find that others are more receptive to your attempts to communicate with them. e Stand up tall: The best way to be seen as assertive and confident is to keep your body language tall and open. The best way to do this is to straighten your spine, keep your head straight, and make sure that your legs are nicely spaced. You should stand with your feet at shoulder width apart—doing so makes it clear to other people that you are confident and comfortable with yourself. e Use power poses: Some poses, such as standing calmly and tall while your hands are behind your back, exude confidence without being overpowering. If you are able to use your power poses, you will not only tell other people that you are comfortable and confident, you will also begin to feel more confident as well. e Keep track of your hands: Make sure you watch what your hands are doing. It can be incredibly easy to offend someone with a misplaced gesture or by hiding your hand in your pocket. Be mindful of what you do with them to ensure that you show that you are calm and in control. Make good eye contact: This cannot be more important or more emphasized—you need to be able to make good eye contact to be deemed as confident. Avoid fidgeting: People who are unconfident often find that they are regularly caught up in fidgeting or other nervous behaviors simply because they are uncomfortable. Their body betrays that lack of confidence. Try to stand still and open when you are communicating in order to be seen as confident. Open body language: Make sure that you keep your body language wide open. This means that you cannot be crossing your arms in front of you or otherwise attempting to hide when communicating. You want to ensure that the other person does not see you as dishonest or unwilling to communicate effectively. Chapter 10: NLP for a Successful Life Finally, we have reached the last chapter in this book. You may be feeling like you have far more insight into how you can use NLP and influence other people. However, you can also use it on yourself as well. Do you have some sort of negative trauma that makes it difficult for you to function? Perhaps you feel like you have been held back by your emotions or attempts to get through life. Well, after reading this book, you now have several tools that can help you feel better about who you are, what you want, and how you live life. All you need to do is begin to utilize them. NLP can be used upon yourself regularly enough to make yourself happier, healthier, and more confident. In attracting happiness and confidence, you will find that you are far more successful in your endeavors. You may realize that you are able to better communicate and relate to people after having defeated your anxiety or fears. You may find that you are able to get along better because you can communicate easier. You may find that you are simply feeling better without that concern over how people will see you is gone. When you are able to wield NLP for yourself, you can begin to defeat any traumas that have lingered, holding you back for far too long. You will be able to reframe those traumas, separating from that negativity and figuring out ways to make those memories something far less traumatic. You will be able to anchor yourself in a process that is incredibly similar to the one used for other people, and with using this, you will find that you are able to defeat negative habits. With those habits gone, you will feel far more capable. You will be empowered. You will be successful. You will be using NLP for its truest purpose—to wield to help others and yourself. This chapter will guide you through three techniques that you can use to wield the power of NLP on yourself. You will learn how to use dissociation in order to distance yourself from feelings related to a specific traumatic event or to remove a trigger between an event and a feeling. You will learn to use reframing to change the way that you view an event or memory. Lastly, you will be guided through how to anchor yourself with ease. Dissociation Anxiety can be debilitating, especially if it is an anxiety toward something that you must face regularly. Let’s go back to the example of the woman who had an accident in front of her class and could never get past it again. She may decide, after reading through this book, that she wants to go through the process of dissociation. She wants to figure out how to remove that inherent link between her negative feelings and being able to go in front of crowds once and for all. This process involves three simple steps: Identify the problematic emotion, focus on it and the cause, and then visualize and change. Our friend may identify that she feels shame. She is ashamed that she urinated on herself in class in front of all of her peers, and that shame comes up regularly. She acknowledges that she feels that same shame every time she stands in front of other people, such as her coworkers, or when she has to go to an interview, and in the back of the mind, she is always afraid that it will happen again. Next, she must visualize the triggering event. In this case, she visualizes the incident like it was yesterday—she stops and remembers how she felt when she had to go to the restroom but was too afraid to raise her hand and ask to go. She had been embarrassed that she was going to go during a presentation, and she worried that those around her would be angry that she did not hear the presentation that was given. She imagines elementary school her going up to the front of the class, trying desperately to give her own presentation, even though she really needed to go to the restroom. She hears the sound of the rain pitter pattering on the window in the classroom, and she remembers the sensation of wet warmth spreading down her legs. She remembers the sound of laughter that exploded within the room and the embarrassment and tears as she ran to the bathroom, with urine squelching in her shoes. She remembers this as vividly as possible, and she can feel her face turning bright red in shame as she does. With the memory firmly in mind, it is time to repeat that scene again, but this time, trying to distance herself from the shame that she felt. It is time for her to look at the memory in a way that reduces the negativity. Perhaps she imagines that everyone wet their pants at the same time, and the laughter was directed toward everyone, not just her. Maybe she imagines that instead of urine, she had spilled soda or something else on her lap. She wants to change the context, so it is no longer distressing and instead funny. Over time, the negative emotions will fade away. It may take time and repetition, but over time, the feelings of shame will be desensitized and fade away. Content Reframing Another technique that can be useful toward yourself is learning to reframe the content. You will effectively be taking the feeling that you want to eliminate and reframing what has happened in order to change the result. This is effectively attempting to tap into the cycle of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. For example, if you feel like you are a bad person, you are going to act in ways that fail to show that you are a good person—you will be nervous and flighty. This will lead other people to want to keep their distance, only further reinforcing that initial thought of being a bad person. When you are able to remove that initial negative feeling, so you stop obsessing, you will see a change in behavioral patterns as well. For example, let’s go back to the woman who urinated in class as a child. She is so concerned with embarrassing herself in public again that she gets afraid every time he knows that she has to perform or give a presentation. This leads to nervousness, which leads to a failure to perform to satisfaction, which further reinforces her fear. In reframing, you will effectively stop focusing on the negative and instead shift your attention to something else that will help, such as accepting your own responsibility for your emotions. You may decide that you will no longer worry about failing or making a mistake and instead focus on how to ensure that your project is as successful as possible. In doing so, you will actually shift your attention to something that you can fix. In the end, you will perform better and teach yourself that the shift in attention is absolutely necessary. You will find that life gets better and that you actually are not as afraid of presentations as you initially were because you have begun to get some positive experiences out of it. Anchoring Yourself Finally, the last process that will be discussed within this book is how to anchor yourself. You will be able to use that anchoring process with all of the benefits of anchoring that was discussed earlier and begin to apply it to yourself as well. The only real difference in anchoring yourself versus anchoring others is that when you anchor yourself, much more of the process is internal. You do not have to try to trigger emotions in other people—instead, you are focused on yourself and what you need to do. This will follow the same steps as anchoring other people: You will still be making it a point to identify an emotion, identifying a trigger for the emotion, identifying an anchor, triggering the emotion, and then using the anchor until it works. That stays the same. What changes are the methods through which you are able to anchor other people? Instead of focusing on how to trigger the feelings in other people externally, you must trigger them within yourself. For example, consider our friend who had the accident once more. Perhaps she wants to stop feeling anxious and instead feel relaxed when she is presenting. She declares that the feeling that she wishes to trigger is relaxation. She then must think of a time during which she felt that emotion incredibly strongly in order to use it. Perhaps she chooses a time on her wedding night during which she and her newlywed husband watched the sunset over the ocean to the sound of the waves lapping at the beach. That time was particularly relaxing for her and she loved it. That memory becomes her trigger for her emotion. Now, she chooses a simple anchor—she decides to use a very specific tapping pattern of her toes against the bottom of her shoe, as she knows that it will be discreet, and she will be able to use it in public without anyone ever knowing. She thinks about that memory at the beach, waiting for the feelings of relaxation to wash over her, and right as those emotions reach their peak, she taps her toes within her shoe to the pattern she is linking to the memory. Over the course of several days and attempts at this, she finds that every time she taps her toes, she is reminded of that relaxing memory. She has now anchored herself to that feeling and can use it any time she is in public and feeling distressed, or whenever she has to present for someone at work. She can use these techniques and find that her stress and anxiety simply melt away. Conclusion Congratulations! You have made it to the end of Manipulation and Dark Psychology. Throughout this journey, you have been provided with several different methods through which you could control other people’s mind, whether through influence, manipulation, NLP, or persuasion. Each of these tactics have their uses in certain contexts, and as you are ready to embark on your journey beyond this book, you may even have some ideas of how you wish to wield the information contained within. Throughout this book, you were provided with advice that was meant to be actionable. Whenever possible, you were given a step by step guide, and hopefully, you have found this to be useful for you as you prepare to take this advice into the real world. Remember, as you prepare to leave this book behind that you keep any usage of the techniques within this book as benevolent as possible. Remember, people have a right to their own free will, and while it can be fun to think about the idea of taking control of someone else just to see if you can, doing so is not kind or respectful to the people around you. You must remember to use the information included in this book respectfully and responsibly. After all, little is as precious to people as their own free will and minds. Now, you may be wondering what to do next with the information that you have read. You may be itching to try some of these techniques, and that makes sense! You may be curious to see how much of this book is actually truthful. So long as you are willing to take responsibility for anything that you do, you are free to do what you want. From here, some places to go next may be to look into more about dark psychology. You may be interested in other techniques that can be used to influence other people. Another good place to go from here would be to look into how to analyze people better. After all, so much of the skills include within this book require you to be skilled at understanding the state of mind of someone else. Perhaps you are interested in learning about the people whose minds are prone to wield manipulation, such as the narcissist. Maybe you want to see more about dark psychology and how else you can slip into the mind of someone else completely undetected. Perhaps what you really want to do is learn how to use someone else’s unconscious mind against them. No matter what you wish to do next, remember what you have been taught here. Remember the importance of respecting the integrity of other people whenever possible and to act in ways that are responsible and not abusive or controlling. It can be easy to wield these tools like the manipulator and the abuser, but then you have lowered yourself to their levels. Thank you for joining me on this journey into the unconscious mind and looking at how you can access and influence it in nearly anyone. If you have found this book to be actionable, helpful, informative, or beneficial in any way, please feel free to leave a review on Amazon. Your insight and opinion is always greatly welcomed and appreciated! Dark Psychology Secrets Techniques of Dark Psychology to Analyze and Read People's Mind with Persuasion, Hypnosis, Deception, and Brainwashing Introduction Congratulations on purchasing Dark Psychology Secrets and thank you for doing so. Have you ever wondered why some of the most insidious people on the planet are somehow able to charm everyone to fall for their every whim? Think of serial killers like Ted Bundy—he was commonly believed to be a handsome, charismatic young man that was able to quickly and easily win the favor of others almost naturally, and yet behind the scenes, he was a serial rapist and murderer of at least 30 homicides over a 4 year period of time. How did he do it? How was he able to sneak past so many people undetected for so long? The answer is through dark psychology. Many of the darkest personality types out there are quite capable of seeming charming and affable, only to be hiding the monster underneath their masks. This is a method they use to prey on other people, victimizing those who dare to fall for their charm. Dark psychology delves into these personality types, studying the underlying motivations for the behaviors at hand. This is not only to understand what to look out for when you are in the real world—when you learn to understand the minds of those with dark personalities, you can begin to claim their own ways of thinking. Dark psychology is a study of people with these dark personalities, but also a study of the tactics that are used, why they work, and how they can be adapted. You can use several of these tactics without becoming abusive or using them in a harmful way. What if you were able to find ways to come across as charming and persuasive to others, and you used those powers to help yourself and others? Perhaps you, being charismatic and particularly skilled in influence, were able to become a powerful leader within a company—you could use the powers of dark psychology to keep morale up, keep people motivated, and ensure that others are happy and willing to move forward. You would be able to always find the perfect way to convince other people to carry on. You would be able to ensure that everyone under your charge was happy to help. You would find yourself running a particularly successful business. Now, what if you were in sales or politics and convincing people is what you need to do best? Dark psychology can show you the ways that people are able to slip undetected into the mind of another to plant ideas, convince others to see things your way, and move forward. You could use these skills in advertising or consulting. Despite the root in darkness and evil, dark psychology techniques can be particularly useful, even under the most innocent contexts, and this book seeks to show you exactly how they are able to do that. This book will guide you through an overview of dark psychology, allowing you to get to know those dark personality types and how they work. You will learn about manipulation and how to use it to control the minds of others. You will learn to persuade with skill. You will understand the insidiousness of brainwashing and how it can be used to completely indoctrinate a person into a certain belief system. You will discover deception and neuro linguistic processing. You will learn to use hypnosis to coax people into a state of suggestibility. Lastly, you will see the benefits of dark psychology, learning how it can be used in daily relationships in order to help all involved. There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much useful information as possible, please enjoy! Chapter 1: Dark Psychology Psychology at its root is something that is relatively simple to define—it is the scientific study of the mind. It covers several different aspects, looking into relationships, behaviors, thought processes, and more. When you are looking into psychology, you are looking for the why and how of essentially any human process form the mental side. You may be looking at neurobiological processes, such as what happens within the brain when it is actively controlling the body, or you may be looking at why that 5 year old child at the grocery store had a massive meltdown when told no to candy. It studies all of that and more, but essentially, it is the study of who we are as a species and as an individual. It studies what we do, what drives us, and what causes us problems. It explains emotions and how they both function and aid humans in acting. It explains why some people give in to pressure, but others do not. It explains why empathy is so important. Ultimately, psychology exists in several different classifications. Some people are only interested in the physical aspect while others care about development. Others still are interested in the divergences between typical psychological development and the developments of people who may become particularly hard to live with. It has several uses, both practical and simply intellectual—if you understand human psychology, you are able to see and predict how people will behave. Knowing those tendencies, you can accurately figure out what will happen, and learn how to use those tendencies to your own benefit. Defining Dark Psychology Dark psychology, in particular, will look specifically at the psychology of people that have a very specific personality type. In particular, we are looking at those who are Machiavellian, narcissistic, sadistic, and psychopathic. These people tend to be among the most dangerous that you can encounter, and they will have no qualms about using and abusing other people. However, there is much to learn from this personality type—if you can come to understand this personality type and the tactics that are commonly used, you will be able to emulate them without the threat or harm that may otherwise go along with them. In particular, this book will be looking at the behaviors of those with dark personality types. We will spend Chapter 2 looking specifically at the dark side of psychology, studying what those particular personality traits are and how they present themselves. From there, the duration of the book will be spent studying the behavior of those specific personality types. Dark psychology assumes that when people behave in abusive manners, using techniques like manipulation and deception, it almost always has a reason. We will look at those reasons and applications as well, learning what it is that makes these tools so attractive to monsters in human clothing that are willing to wield them. You will see exactly why people behave in ways that are abusive or evil, how they come to the realization that they do that justifies the abuse in their minds, and how they are able to overcome the empathy and compassion that usually prevents people from behaving in such abusive manners. We will look at several of the most commonly used techniques of the abusive personality types, and from there, we will spend time discussing how several of them can be used in a wider context, allowing for their usages during day to day interactions. Instead of manipulating someone to abuse them, you can look into how to use the same skills to help persuade and guide people toward whatever they need to do. We will also look into how these particular tactics impact the person that is being subjected to them. Some of these techniques work through instilling feelings in other people, knowing that emotions are incredibly motivating. Others work through accessing the unconscious mind, suggesting certain behaviors. Others still work through acts of deception. Understanding dark psychology will not only enable you to understand the actions of personality types such as the narcissist, the Machiavellian, and the psychopath but also be able to combat it. You will be able to avoid falling for their tactics if you know what the tactics are. This means that learning to think like the darkest personality types is imperative—when you can think like them, you can identify them. The History of Dark Psychology Traditionally considered a field of applied psychology, dark psychology begins with the study of the dark triad or the study of manipulation. Considering that dark personality types have existed as long as history can record, it comes as no surprise that those interested in understanding these dark types have been scattered across history as well. In particular, it is possible to find evidence of studies surrounding manipulation and abuse in nearly every culture around the world. Humans have always victimized other humans as long as they have been able to. You can read in history books about how people used to take slaves, destroy other towns and villages, and steal. Ultimately, up until relatively recently in history, attempts to manipulate and control other people were common, but not particularly controlled or recorded. It happened on a regular basis, but without proper guidance and logging that allows for it to be tracked. After all, even religious texts make reference to manipulation, such as referencing Eve being deceived by the snake. In proper psychology, there have been studies to determine how stimulations of any kind can change behaviors. These have studied aspects such as whether fear can be conditioned and learned, or whether adding certain situations or wording could convince people to act in certain ways. Perhaps one of the earliest records of controlling the behaviors of others comes in 1897 with Ivan Pavlov’s study of dogs and their behavior. He learned that some of the behavior of dogs seems to be innate, such as salivating in response to food. He also learned that innate behaviors can be linked to other stimuli. Instead of the dog salivating at food, for example, he conditioned the dogs to salivate to the sound of a bell through what was eventually called classical conditioning. In classical conditioning, you are able to take unconditioned responses and cause them with unconditioned stimuli. The food is the unconditioned stimulus, and in response to seeing it, the dog will salivate in response. That unconditioned stimulus gets paired with a conditioned stimulus, and in response over time, you will see that the unconditioned response occurs when exposed to the conditioned stimulus. The concept of classical conditioning was strongly supported by psychologist John Watson, who declared that he believed that classical conditioning was involved in all aspects of human development and psychology. He pushed the point in 1920 in an experiment during which he conditioned a 9 month old infant to fear anything white and fuzzy. In particular, during this experiment, a child referred to as Little Albert was provided access to several white animals in a neutral setting. He was shown a rat, a rabbit, a monkey, and several other items. At first, Little Albert was not afraid of any of them. He was unafraid of what he saw in front of him. Eventually, the white rat was presented, along with the sudden loud bang of a hammer on a steel bar just behind his head. While the rat itself was not disturbing to the child, the sound was, and he cried. From 11 months on, he was exposed to the rat with the loud noise occurring once a week for seven weeks. Of course, the child cried each time. After the seven weeks, all that researchers had to do to trigger the meltdown was to show him the rat in question. Upon seeing the rat, even without the noise, he would cry in fear and attempt to flee. That was not all—Little Albert became phobic of anything that was white and fuzzy. Whether a white dog, a piece of cotton wool or even Santa Claus, the sight of something white and fuzzy was enough to send him into a panic. While this behavioral response faded somewhat over time without reinforcement, it was still readily triggered by repeating the creation of the loud sound that went along with the rat. This becomes a foundation for many different forms of manipulation and influence. You will see this concept arise repeatedly when you look at neuro linguistic programming, during which you will see what is called anchoring, a technique to trigger a certain behavior with a specific emotional response. It can also be relevant in emotional manipulation as well. After the discovery and conceptualization of classical conditioning, the concept of operant conditioning arose as well. Particularly in 1936, B.F Skinner came up with the concept, drawing heavily from Thorndike’s 1898 Law of Effect, which posited that anything with a positive consequence is likely to be repeated, while anything with a negative consequence is going to be avoided. For example, if a child is given a piece of candy after cleaning up his mess, the child is going to be more inclined to pick up the toys in the future, thanks to the positive effect. Conversely, if the child yells at someone and then gets a negative consequence, such as having to go to their room, they are not as likely to repeat it. This concept was reiterated within Skinner’s theory, and he added to it a new concept—reinforcement. Skinner asserted that if a behavior is reinforced, meaning that it is rewarded, it will be repeated or strengthened. The person is likely to repeat those behaviors that are reinforced because they had a good result. However, when reinforcement does not occur, that behavior is going to be weakened or extinguished. In 1948, Skinner reiterated these concepts with experiments. He created what he called a “Skinner Box” which was a box in which an animal had access to a lever, a speaker, and two signal lights. There was also an electrical grid on the bottom that would generate a shock. The animals were shocked when they pressed the lever with a specific light illuminated, but when they used the lever with the other light illuminated, they were rewarded with a piece of food. Through this experiment, it was shown that there are three types of responses that will follow a behavior: Neutral operands, during which the environment neither encourages nor discourages the repetition of behavior, reinforcers, which drive the individual to repeat the behavior and punishers, which discourage the repetition. You will see this concept when looking at techniques such as intermittent reinforcement, during which a manipulator will give positive reinforcement only sometimes. As you can see, much of behaviorism becomes incredibly relevant to the study of dark psychology. The 1960s came with Albert Bandura, another prominent behaviorist, acknowledging and agreeing with classical and operant conditioning while also adding two distinct and important ideas. He asserted that there are processes between the stimuli exposed to and responses and that behavior is a learned concept that develops via observational learning. In particular, Bandura presented an experiment known as the Bobo doll experiment in 1961. He argued that children, in particular, will pay attention to the behaviors or their models—people that they are surrounded by—and they will imitate the behaviors that they were exposed to. Think of how a toddler may yell out something embarrassing in public, not realizing that it is embarrassing because he has heard it from his parents: This is the perfect example. In Bandura’s experiment, he exposed children between the ages of 3 and 6 to violent behaviors toward a doll. First, children were studied to see how aggressive they were as a baseline. They were then sorted into groups of similar temperaments, in which some were shown an aggressive role model, some were shown a non aggressive role model, and some were given no role model. The aggressive role model was aggressive toward a Bobo doll —they were given a hammer to beat the doll with and threw the doll around while yelling, “Pow, boom!” The non aggressive model saw a model ignoring the doll and playing with another toy quietly. The children were then offered access to several other toys, which a researcher told them were the best toys of all. Their behaviors were then recorded. Children who had been exposed to the aggressive behaviors tended to behave aggressively toward the Bobo doll that they had access to. This shows us that children learn behaviors through observation—social behavior is learned and influenced heavily based upon model, becoming the basis for the Social Learning Theory. This is further supported in several of the tactics used in dark psychology as well. People are more readily persuaded by people similar to them, much like how the children are more likely to mimic people similar to them. People are also more likely to mimic others in unfamiliar settings as well, which is displayed in tactics such as persuasion. As you continue to read through this book, you will find that much of the concepts that are innately used by the manipulators that are being studied involve many of the concepts of behaviorism. It becomes recurring, and in a way, it makes sense: Behaviorism is a study of how people act and how the environment influences behavior. Dark psychology seeks to control and change the behaviors of other people. As you continue to read, keep these key processes in mind as they will be quite relevant. Chapter 2: The Dark Side of Personality Imagine Anna for a moment: Young, finishing up her last year at college, and single. She is out with friends at a bar, and her other two friends have both already met people that they are animatedly chatting with. Anna, however, is a bit more self conscious. She does not feel like she belongs there, and she sits between her friends, sipping at her drink. Then, she sees him. The man is handsome and smiling at her. He approaches and offers to buy her a drink. He says his name is Ethan and that he has just graduated from the same university Anna goes to, just last year. He asks a few questions that are not too prying—is she a student? What is she studying? What a coincidence—he also majored in business! Is she from the area? No way— he grew up 30 minutes from her hometown. They seem like normal questions to Anna—he is getting to know her, and it appears that they have several major things in common. She chats with him, and soon, they are talking about her past relationship and how it was incredibly messy, so she isn’t looking for anything at the moment. Instead of scaring him away, he nods sagely and acknowledges that he had been in a relationship with a particularly abusive, narcissistic woman not too long ago and he was just looking for someone to get to know as friends. They spend the rest of the night in the bar chatting happily, and when Anna and her friends are ready to go, he smiles, writes down his phone number for her, and bids them good night. Anna finds herself hooked—she cannot stop thinking about Ethan and how much they had in common. Soon, she is texting him, and she finds out that not only have their lives paralleled quite closely, they share very similar hobbies. They both like to sit in and read with a nice cup of wine. They both like to go on hikes in the nearby mountains. They both share a love for playing video games—but the same type of obscure RPG, not the mainstream titles that come out. Soon, Ethan has slid into Anna’s life entirely. He is over at her apartment 5 or 6 days a week and stays the night at least half of them, usually falling asleep halfway through a movie. He brings her flowers and lavishes her in positive attention. He loves to listen for hours about everything that she has gone through in the last few years and offer his own opinions as someone who had been in a similar relationship before. Anna tells herself that he is the one. He is different. He is kind and caring. He knows how to listen. She soon finds herself head over heels in love with him. They fall hard and fast for each other, and within three months, they are engaged—after all, they are soul mates. Six months later, she is pregnant. Nine months later, they are married. Shortly before the baby is born, it is like a switch has flipped. He is mean and cold. He is constantly disappearing overnight at the bar. He puts her down and when she cries, he calls her hormonal. It was like the Ethan that she knew, loved, and married, was nothing but a lie. This is because he had lied. People with dark personalities have no qualms about preying on other people. Just as the wolf does not think twice about the feelings of deer, the dark personality type does not care about his victims. Ethan had disguised himself precisely because he was hunting Anna: He was intentionally trying to make himself attractive to her—he wanted to be able to interest and attract her in order to gain control. Oftentimes, people with dark personalities, with the propensity to manipulate, hunt, and use other people, present themselves in four different ways: They are Machiavellian, narcissistic, sadistic, or psychopathic. Some people will have several of these traits, while others may have just one. Nevertheless, these people are dangerous. They are not afraid of inflicting extreme mental, and sometimes even physical, harm to other people in order to get what they want or need. All that matters to them is that they get exactly what it is that they needed. People with these dark personality types are known as having dark cores— they are more likely to engage in antisocial behaviors such as behaving malevolently, stealing, cheating, or hurting other people. These are the people engaging in dark psychology, and the more that you read through the book, the more you will come to recognize the methods through which these personality types choose to act. Within this chapter, we will stop and take a look at four of the darkest personality types—we will look at the Machiavellian, the narcissist, the psychopath, and the sadist. We will go over the classical presentation of each of these personality traits, as well as the motivators for each. While each of them is their own distinct type, with very specific traits, they all share similarities. In particular, each of these dark personality types lacks empathy. A Note on Empathy Empathy is the ability to understand and feel other people’s emotions. It is primarily responsible for facilitating communication between people, allowing others access to the emotional states of those around them. In particular, it allows for people to act compassionately—you can put yourself in someone else’s shoes, so to speak. If you can see that the person across from you is stressed out, you can relate. You can feel that sort of stress yourself if you are particularly empathetic. In knowing the emotions of someone else, you can then feel moved to help—you can offer to do something to alleviate that stress. In other instances, empathy allows for the regulation of your own behaviors. If you can empathize with someone else, you can make sure that you, yourself, are not the cause of their distress. Consider for a moment that you are talking to someone and say something that offends them. If you can empathize with them, you can see and understand that you upset them—and you actually care. In being able to acknowledge that you have upset them, you can then make it a point to change your own behaviors. This is why empathy is so critical, and why lacking it can be so dangerous. It is what usually acts as a deterrent to hurting other people needlessly. Machiavellianism The first of the personality traits that will be discussed is Machiavellianism. Machiavellians are people who are highly manipulative by nature—they are able to cheat people out of things without you ever knowing that it has happened. This particular trait is named for Niccolo Machiavelli—a diplomat and philosopher responsible for writing The Prince—a book that discussed that strong rulers must be harsh on their subjects in order to keep their rule. In particular, it is believed that the earning of glory and survival will justify any means. Effectively, then, this is the beginning of the flawed idea that the ends will always justify the means. The people with this personality type, then, encompass that form of thinking. They feel that they can be manipulative with little repercussions, or that the repercussions are meaningless so long as they get their way. The Machiavellian is focused on his or her own ambition—all that matters is success, no matter what the cost. They will always prioritize their own success, regardless of what their idea of success is. If they believe that success is defined by their income, they will maximize that income, no matter the cost, for example. Of course, if they are willing to succeed at any cost, they are typically incredibly exploitative. They will have no issues with taking advantage of other people, their weaknesses, or even throwing people under the bus if they think that it will be enough to get them the success, they believe that they deserve. There is no such thing as going too far with the Machiavellian, so long as the Machiavellian gets his or her way at the end of the day. These people tend to be incredibly calculating. They will constantly be acting in their own best interests, even when people do not think that they are. If they are kind and do a favor, it is because they know that doing that favor is the best way to ensure that the other party is going to give them what they want later. Nothing they do is without reason, and they are not likely to help other people unless they can see some sort of legitimate benefit to doing so. This makes it incredibly difficult to identify their true intentions. The Machiavellian, despite coming across as charming and flattering, is usually incredibly cynical—he does not believe that anyone will ever do anything for reasons that are not self serving. To the Machiavellian, if anyone does something nice to them, it is because they want or need something and think that being ice will get it. In reality, they lack the value of inherent human kindness that they typically take advantage of, and their lack of empathy means that they do not care when they are taking advantage of other people. They will actively and readily harm other people, making other people fall for them without ever really committing to legitimate relationships. However, because they are so skilled at reading those around them and deceiving other people, they are commonly seen as far more charismatic and caring than they actually are. Narcissism The narcissist, on the other and is far less intentional and calculating. While the Machiavellian is incredibly meticulous in his manipulation, narcissists do not make the intentional decision to be manipulative people. They also lack the empathy necessary to regulate their actions regarding how other people see them, but in terms of the motivations, the narcissist is manipulative because the narcissist is delusional. The narcissists are particularly exhausting because they have their own grand sense of self—in fact, it is so grand, that most of the time, it is grandiose. They are completely convinced that they are the best people out there, and entirely perfect. Because they are so confident in their perfection, they effectively believe that they are right all the time. There is no way that they can be wrong because they believe that they cannot be flawed, and this turns into them believing that when there is a disconnect between what they expect to be true versus what is actually true, they tend to assume that their own beliefs are the ones that are right. This gets incredibly exhausting as people deal with them—they believe that they are perfect and inherently deserving of more than those around them. They think that they deserve special treatment and consideration and that treatment and consideration means that they will do anything to get it. Effectively, the narcissist’s manipulation and harm toward others comes out of that expectation of being right all of the time, believing that their grandiosity is justification of everything. However, the problem with the narcissist is that he is so skilled in convincing other people that he is right and deserving of special treatment that he will even gaslight himself into believing it. The narcissist will absolutely believe his narrative of what happens. If he tells someone that something did not happen in a certain way, they have likely convinced themselves of that narrative to protect that image of perfection that they are so certain about. They will always believe that they are deserving of that perfection, no matter what. Narcissists themselves crave the center of attention—while they are unable to empathize with other people, they absolutely believe that they are deserving of the adoration of others, and they require it in order to feel like they are justified. They have a constant need to be admired, and if they are not admired, they will do things to gain that admiration, even if it hurts other people. Psychopathy Of the four traits that we are looking at, psychopaths are quite arguably the worst of the four. These people have the greatest potential to be harmful. When attempting to identify their personality tendencies, the psychopath is someone who flags as highly callous, impulsive, manipulative, and grandiose. Effectively, the psychopath is someone who is not afraid of hurting other people to get what he wants. He is willing to give in to those impulses that would usually be disregarded quickly. If he has the thought that he wants to hurt someone else or toy with someone’s emotions, he will do so as a game, simply because he can. He believes that he is able to do this without regard for the feelings of other people, and he will do it without thinking twice. Like the narcissist, the psychopath thinks incredibly highly of himself—he believes that he is smarter than other people and that he is skilled enough to get away with whatever he wants to do. If he decides that he will become a serial killer, he is convinced that no one will ever be able to catch him—he is entirely of the belief that he is more intelligent, sneakier, and more capable than any of the people who have attempted this manipulation before him. Despite the monstrous nature of the psychopath, they are actually incredibly adept at social situations. Unlike the narcissist, who may struggle in social settings if his grandiosity gets the best of him, the psychopath is even more skilled at blending in. They are able to emulate normal humans with ease and will do so to their own advantage. They see their skill at blending in as a game and they will often try to convince as many people as possible that they are trustworthy in order to take advantage again later. Sadism While the previous three make up the personality types commonly referred to as the dark triad, there is one more trait that is important to consider here when discussing dark psychology—the sadist. The sadist has all of the callousness of the dark triad, but unlike them, they are not particularly impulsive or manipulative. The sadist is someone who is entirely motivated because he enjoys being cruel. The everyday sadist simply wants to hurt people or watch people suffer. He may make it a point to join the military or police force, allowing himself to shield himself from any repercussions. Within those particular career paths, he may feel like he can hurt people or be exposed to harm of others without having to hide it. Of course, if that sadism comes along with one of the other personality types, such as paired with narcissistic personality disorder, it can become incredibly problematic—the sadistic narcissist is one that genuinely enjoys hurting people but may even feel like he has a right to do so. He will be able to justify his actions without having to try very hard simply because he knows that he is better than other people. Dark Personalities and Abuse Ultimately, these personality types lend themselves to abusive individuals due to the increase in callousness when compared to the others. Because of the callousness, none of the people discussed in this chapter have any qualms about their abuse. This means that Ethan, in his relationship with Anna, does not care about the pain that has been inflicted. He does not care that he effectively trapped someone under false pretenses, creating an indelible bond between the two of them forever. Even if she were to leave, she would never be able to truly escape him thanks to the fact that they share a child. Studies have been done on the dark personality types that have shown that these people will tend to choose to act in ways that inflict pain, especially if they are quite sadistic. In this study, people were asked to choose from one of several jobs—the study was disguised in order to make the participants believe that they were looking at personality type and job preference. The jobs were to reflect the type of dark behaviors that they would then be told to do. Some of the jobs were to work in the cold, work in sanitation, or being an exterminator. Unsurprisingly, most of the sadists chose extermination. From there, the scientists created what they called a killing machine—a coffee grinder that was modified in order to make crunching sounds, and they were instructed that they had to kill several bugs in names with cute names in an attempt to humanize them. Throughout the experiment, the sadists absolutely did choose to kill the bugs, and they were not disgusted by it. They were happy to kill the bugs and enjoyed it, though compared to people without sadistic tendencies, they enjoyed anything that they chose to do less than their non sadistic counterparts. After these results, another experiment was performed—during this one, people were sorted based on personality, and then were asked to play a computer game. The people playing the game were told that they were competing in order to blast a loud noise at the people in the other room. If they won, they would be able to choose how long and loud the blast would be. As an important note, the opponents never blasted back. Half of these people would then have to work to be cruel—if they won, they would then need to count before the blast of noise would occur, with the interest of the study being how likely the extra work would deter the people from being aggressive. Ultimately, only the sadists chose to work to hurt the other party. While those with the dark personality types would all inflict some degree of harm to the opponents when it was easy, adding the extra layer of work was enough to deter the other personality types. Beyond just that, the sadists also chose to raise the blast and make it longer just to hurt the other team when they realized that there would be no retaliation. Effectively, then, the sadists are the ones who are more likely to hurt other people. Even the psychopaths, who will hurt or kill without feeling bad about it, usually had purpose to drive them. The Machiavellians were too calculating to risk the harm of other people unless they felt like the payoff was right. The narcissists usually went out of their way to hurt others when they were threatened. However, the sadists would hurt just to enjoy themselves. This means that, at the end of the day, it is the sadists that are going to be the most manipulative. The narcissists will be aggressive and abusive in response to the perception of a threat to themselves or their ego. The psychopath will hurt to gain something or because he wants something. The Machiavellian will abuse only when it seems like the best way to get what he wants, and it will not be risky to do so. Chapter 3: Manipulation Perhaps one of the most common forms of the usage of dark psychology is via the use of manipulation. Ethan manipulated Anna as he made it a point to get to know her, little by little in order to reflect back what he thought she wanted to see. In an act known as narcissistic mirroring, he was able to present himself as exactly what Anna wanted, allowing him to draw her in. She was convinced that he was perfect in every way when in reality, it was all a fagade—he hid behind a very specialized mask in order to win his prize: Anna. Manipulation primarily exists in two forms—it can be covert, meaning that it happens without the manipulated individual knowing about it, or it can be overt and in everyone’s face, such as extortion or blackmail that involves threatening and coercing the other person into obedience with them knowing full well that they must either comply or suffer the consequences. In particular, those within the dark tetrad tend to prefer the covert forms of manipulation—they want to be able to do their jobs well and effectively without worrying about the aftermath. They think that their attempts to manipulate will be more effective if they remain hidden, and for the most part, they are right. When you want to understand manipulation, you must first learn to define manipulation and how it works. When you understand that definition, you can start to understand how it is used in order to be effective. Once you understand the pattern of how manipulation is used, you can begin to recognize several specifically manipulative tactics that are commonly used. In recognizing the common tactics of manipulators, you can begin to recognize the manipulator. Finally, in recognizing the manipulator, you can defend against manipulation. Defining Manipulation Psychological manipulation is ultimately a form of social influence—that means that it is attempting to succeed at one of three different end goals: It will gain compliance, in which the people will agree to do something, even if they do not actually believe it is the right thing to do, it will gain identification, which will change the thoughts of the other person, or it will gain internalization, in which it will cause a change in belief or behavior that is also agreed with publicly and privately. Compliance * Obedience publically, even if individual does not believe in what he or she is doing a * Individualchoosesto do somethingto belike someoneelse | * A change in values and behaviors both publically and privately | Effectively, then, manipulation seeks to change someone’s actions, thoughts, or both to fit with whatever it is that the manipulator is encouraging. In particular, though, manipulation tends to be indirect, deceptive, or underhanded. It is designed specifically to change the thoughts or behavior without the other person being aware of it while also serving the manipulator in some way. Most often, the manipulator has some sort of agenda that is being addressed —that agenda becomes the goal for that manipulation attempt. Ethan wanted to win Anna’s favor, for example—he made it a point to convince her that he was someone he was not because he saw something that he liked within her. A narcissist may manipulate someone because he wants to gain that approval and acknowledgment that he needs if he wants to feel comfortable in his own skin. The sadist may manipulate because he wants to inflict pain. The Machiavellian may manipulate because he wants to be able to achieve an end goal and manipulation is the only way it will happen. In order for manipulation to be successful, no matter what the end goal of it is, three criteria must be met. The aggression must be concealed in some way, usually with the manipulator seeming like someone trustworthy or worthy of respect and consideration. The manipulator must have some working knowledge of any vulnerabilities that will be exploited, understanding how best to move forward to manipulate. Lastly, the manipulator must be ruthless enough to not care about lying and potentially hurting the other person. Think about how this relates back to Ethan for a moment. He came across as perfectly charming in the beginning and Anna never suspected a thing. He got to know her, noticing in particular exactly how she suffered from an abusive relationship in the past, which he used to force a relationship. He took advantage of that bit of knowledge and then encouraged her to continue discussing anything and everything with her, which he then used against her on a regular basis. Any time she told him about something personal, he would remember and use it to continue to build the relationship more and more. Finally, he was willing to hurt her, even though most people would usually hesitate and avoid doing so. Using Manipulation Most of the time, manipulation occurs in very specific manners. In order to manipulate someone, you must be able to meet one of five criteria to use as the motivator. Think back to the discussion of behaviorism, particularly with Skinner and the discussion of positive reinforcement and punishment. This is where these concepts come back, but in terms of manipulating other people to control their behaviors, most of the time, there are five distinct manners of encouraging or discouraging behavior. In artificially installing the desired behaviors with one of these tactics, the desired behaviors become learned relatively simply. Ultimately, it will be a matter of figuring out which the best particular tactic is for that situation. The manipulator has a lot to consider—is the victim someone timid and easily malleable? They may respond best to positive reinforcement or the use of intermittent reinforcement. Are they more hard headed? It may be best to try utilizing a one trial learning in an attempt to condition the desired response. The five distinct manners of controlling the victims of manipulators are through the use of positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement, intermittent reinforcement, punishment, and traumatic one trial learning. Each of these are used in different ways to differing effects based on the target and the desired goal. As a quick note before continuing, remember that there is an inherent difference between positive and negative, regarding both reinforcement and punishment. When you are adding something, whether that something is good or bad, you are said to be using positive reinforcement or punishment. When you are removing or taking away something, you are using negative reinforcement or punishment. This varies from the traditional understanding of positive and negative in the more colloquial sense, in which people see good things as positive and bad things as negative. We must step past that misperception to truly be able to understand what is being discussed as we Positive reinforcement Negative reinforcement continue. a5 Intermittent reinforcement Traumatic learning For example, if your child pulled straight A’s on his last report card, you may take him out for ice cream—this is an example of positive reinforcement. If you find that your child has failed three classes, however, you may give him extra chores until he has his grades up. This is an example of positive punishment because you are actively giving him an aversive stimulus in response to his misbehavior. Alternatively, taking away your child’s video game system upon realizing that he is failing his classes would be a form of negative punishment—you are taking away something positive. Finally, if you are removing a negative situation, such as no longer nagging at your child after your child has made it a point to turn in all missing work is an example of negative reinforcement—you removed the aversive stimulus to encourage the behavior you wanted. In general, positive reinforcement is by far the gentlest of the forms of manipulation. It will involve the use of creating or giving feedback to the victim in some way to encourage a behavior. Effectively, when the use of positive reinforcement occurs, the victim is rewarded for doing the desired behavior. Think about how a dog that is listening during training is given a reward—they are given a small treat to encourage the repetition of those desired behaviors. This means that they are more likely to continue with those behaviors in the future thanks to the fact that doing them became enjoyable. Because the desired behavior gets associated with reward, the behavior is more likely to be repeated. Negative reinforcement is more or less the opposite: the behavior increases because something negative was removed. Imagine that you are being nagged at by your boss to finish up that assignment for work—you are only alleviated form that constant nagging when you finish. In that case, you were negatively reinforced simply because the removal of the aversive situation happened. Intermittent reinforcement uses reinforcement that is inconsistent. In particular, it is most likely used in the occasional revocation of a negative reinforcement. For example, imagine that Ethan expects Anna to clean the house top to bottom and it is rarely good enough for him, no matter how hard she tries. When she cleans up, she is occasionally granted with the benefit of having him be pleasant, or at the very least, not as grumpy. Occasionally, he chooses to reward her just enough to keep her hooked, making sure that she does not want to leave. Instead, she fights harder because she sees the occasional hope that the Ethan she fell in love with is still there. Punishment is the usage of the addition of something unpleasant in order to dissuade someone from behaving in a certain way. When you are punishing someone, you are usually causing a negative consequence of some sort as a direct result of a behavior, or a lack of the proper behavior, in order to keep the victim on track. Finally, traumatic one trial learning relates to the use of sudden, harsh abuse that is meant to intimidate and traumatize the victim into no longer repeating those tactics again in the future. Effectively, the victim does something that the manipulator is unhappy about and the manipulator drastically punishes him or her. If Anna were to have done something that Ethan did not like, he may have decided to leave her on the side of the road or threaten to take their shred child in order to strongly discourage her from repeating that behavior. The sole purpose of this behavior is to make the person so traumatized as a result that they will no longer repeat those behaviors. Recognizing the Manipulator Identifying the manipulator is something that can be incredibly difficult to pull off. It is tough to ensure that you can spot when someone else is manipulating but being able to do so is incredibly beneficial. Knowledge is power and power is a proper defense from being taken advantage of needlessly. When you want to recognize and identify the manipulator, you will basically be looking for several different traits and actions. If you want to be able to know if the other party is, in fact, manipulating you, stop and reflect on your relationship. As soon as you know what you are looking for, you will find that they become far more transparent than they ever were before. Manipulators will undermine your ability to trust yourself. One of the most common forms of manipulation is known as gaslighting— they use this to convince you that what you think is happening around you is actually all a figment of your imagination. Even if they have done something in front of you, such as taking the last piece of pizza with you right there, they will then deny it, saying that you must have eaten it. They are so skilled at doing this that you may actually begin to believe them, leaving you questioning your own sanity. Manipulators say something different than what they are doing. Rarely do the words and actions of the manipulator match up. When you are being manipulated, you may find that the manipulator is actively saying one thing but doing the exact opposite. Perhaps Ethan says that he has Anna’s best interest at heart, but nothing he does actually reflects that. Instead, he frequently does things that are arguably not in her best interest. What he may say is to make sure that she does not eat unhealthy food is actually little more than an attempt to keep her under his thumb, making her feel bad and causing her to give in without actively trying to fight back. You regularly feel guilty when around the manipulator, and you can’t explain it. When you are around the manipulator, you may find that guilt becomes a common occurrence. No matter how hard you try to avoid it, you cannot help but feel that sense of guilt, despite your best attempts. You think about things and cannot figure out why you would be guilty, and yet there you are, feeling like you should have tried more, done better, or attempted something entirely different altogether. This is not a fault with you—if you are constantly feeling like you are guilty, it is time to reevaluate to determine whether you are simply surrounded by people who are hurting you or if you have actually been behaving in negative ways. The manipulator is always the victim, and you are usually at fault. The manipulator is particularly skilled at ensuring that you feel like whatever has happened is your fault and that whatever it was is a slight toward the manipulator. Even so much as accidentally forgetting to bring your partner’s requested food home from the store will suddenly be spun around, instead becoming a deliberate attempt to hurt the manipulator. The manipulator pushes the relationship far too quickly. Much of the time, the manipulator will make it a point to move the relationship as quickly as possible. They will share more than they really should in order to convince the other party that they are being truthful about what they are doing. They will intentionally try to convince everyone involved that what they need above all is to move quickly. They will love intensely, push business relationships before proper trust is built, and use their own feigned vulnerability to fool those around them into sharing and making themselves vulnerable as well. The manipulator will happily agree or volunteer to help. But then it always turns into a martyr act. While he may have agreed initially, he will show all sorts of reluctance. If you dare to ask him if he is actually reluctant or points out that you will be fine without him, he is likely to instead deny and make you feel guilty about even suggesting such a thing. Instead, his goal is to make you feel like you are indebted to him for future use. The manipulator will always be one step ahead of you. Whether for better or worse, the manipulator will always be further on the spectrum. If you are having a bad day, the manipulator’s day is automatically worse. If you just got into a great university, the manipulator will be quick to remind you about how he went to a better school. They will always simultaneously have it better and worse than you, no matter what is going on. Defending Against Manipulation No one wants to be on the receiving end of manipulation—the problem arises when so many people are victimized without knowing what the signs of manipulation are. When you do finally learn what they are, however, you are able to begin fighting back You can start to make the progress that you will need in order to reclaim your life and keep the other party from hurting you any further. There are several tactics that you can use to defend against manipulation, ranging from avoiding the manipulator altogether to directly countering what is being said to you. From here, we will go over three methods that you can use to defend yourself from manipulation as it arises in your life. Know Your Basic Rights Perhaps one of the best ways to protect yourself is through learning to recognize your own inherent rights as an individual. As a human, you are entitled to several basic human rights, and more often than not, the abuser tries to get around them. When you recognize and defend your basic human rights, you will be able to stand up for yourself—you tell the other party that you are not willing to put up with such blatant disrespect and abuse. Instead of being willing to lie down flatter and completely disregard the fact that you have been treated poorly, you will be instead of making sure that you demand the treatment you deserve. Some of these basic human rights include: e The right to respectful treatment e The right to be expressive of your own thoughts, feelings, and desires e The right to say no for any reason without guilt e The right to get anything that you have paid for e The right to your own free opinion e The right to ensure that you are safe, physically and mentally e The right to happiness e The right to instate and enforce any boundaries Each of these fundamental rights can strengthen your defense against the manipulator. If you say that you deserve respectful treatment and demand it without exception, you can make it clear that you will tolerate nothing less than the utmost basic respect. You will not deal with name calling, harmful or hurtful behavior, or anything else that may keep you down. If you are cognizant of the fact that you have several thoughts that are your own, and you are entitled to those thoughts, no matter what anyone else thinks, you protect yourself from mental manipulation. When you recognize that you are free, physically and mentally, you can stop allowing the manipulator to hold you back. Effectively, these boundaries become your shields with which you fend off the narcissist or manipulator. With those shields, you protect yourself from damage. However, the battle is not won simply by wielding a shield—you need to be proactively able to protect yourself as well. Protecting yourself is as simple as figuring out the best way to probe back at the manipulator. Probing to Defend from Manipulation Questions such as wondering if the request seems reasonable to the manipulator, asking if it sounds fair, and then wondering if you have a say one way or the other are all ways that you can go out of your way to twist things around and put the onus back upon the manipulator. For example, imagine that Ethan tells Anna to run to the store as soon as possible to pick up a very specific item. She is exhausted and does not want to drive across town, but he is incredibly insistent that she goes. She could stop and ask him if that seems reasonable to him. She may ask, “Are you really expecting that I drop everything after having gotten two hours of sleep, right after baby falls asleep, just to get you that special nacho cheese that I can only get across town?” When she twists things around like that, it suddenly seems far less reasonable for her to have to follow through with doing what the manipulator has requested. This works for a very specific reason—you are now twisting things around and putting the pressure back upon the manipulator. When you are able to redirect to the manipulator, you can effectively change the tactic—instead of you being on the defensive, you are suddenly on the offense. Instead of having to defend yourself, you make the manipulator have to defend against you. Effectively, then, you can point out everything that is wrong with the suggestion. You leave the manipulator with two choices: He can deny that what he is saying is unreasonable, saying that he would absolutely go and do what he is asking you to do, or he will be forced to admit that the requests are too one sided and are incredibly unfair. Saying No and Enforcing It The last method that is quite easy to use in order to disarm the manipulator is to simply learn how to say no and mean it. So often, we make it a point to let other people rule our lives. We are willing to put up with what other people tell us to do and what they say simply because we are too afraid to stand up for ourselves. However, think of the implication there—if you do not stand up for yourself, you are going to find yourself struggling. You will always be pushed around, left and right, expected to do whatever the manipulators that want to take advantage of you determine is right. When you learn how to say no, however, you take away that power. The only power that the bully initially holds over you is the power to rule your life. When you learn to say no and really mean it, you are actively telling people that they cannot control you. You are saying that you do not consent to being taken advantage of, and that is significant. If you can tell other people no, then, you can follow through and avoid falling for the problems that the manipulator wants you to. Manipulators count on what is called the nice guy or nice girl syndrome— they assume that you will say yes simply in the name of being polite, and as soon as they know that they have an in somehow, whether through you, your actions, behaviors, or anything else, they will not hesitate to take advantage of you, over and over again without relenting. The only way to end this is with your own boundaries. This means that when you say no, you need to enforce it. If they continue to try to pester you into something, you are within your rights to simply walk away. You do not have to consent to being controlled, and in fact, you are going to be happier and better off if you refuse to altogether. Saying no does not have to be difficult either—all you need to do is apologize, say that it does not work for you, and move on. There is no reason to explain why it does not work, no matter how hard the other party pushes for a reason—if you relent and give them the reason it does not work, they will try to find a way to disregard what you are saying in order to try to force you into agreeing. Simply responding with, “That doesn’t work for me, sorry,” is the perfectly polite way to shut someone else down without having to provide much information. Remember, an invitation does not mean that you are forced to do something, and a demand is not mandatory unless enforced by the law. When your boundaries are ignored and continuously stomped upon, what you must do is find a way to stand up for yourself. The best way to do so is to keep your distance from the other party. While they may initially accuse you of being manipulative or controlling, keep in mind that all you are doing is choosing to not expose yourself to their ridiculous demands. You are protecting yourself, and you should not feel guilty for doing so. Instead, focus on the fact that you can get that distance that you needed while also making a point to heal. If they try to convince you that you are punishing them, remind yourself that you are simply giving yourself time until you can see them again without being angry, whether that is in the near future or never. You are well within your rights to choose who you associate with, and even if they cry and complain and tell everyone that you are a horrible person, you are truly only responsible for your own feelings and opinion. Chapter 4: Manipulation Techniques to Control Minds At this point, you should have a fairly decent understanding of the concept of manipulation. You should see how it works and be prepared to identify it. However, what can make this situation even easier to identify is learning how to control minds yourself. Remember, the more you learn and the more you are able to understand, the more likely that it is that you can protect yourself. The tactics that are going to be used here are quite dangerous in the wrong hands—for people who have no qualms about hurting other people, these can absolutely be weaponized into dangerous techniques that can truly convince other people to do dangerous, horrible things. However, they can also provide you with valuable insight into the mind of not only the dark personality, but also into the mind of the people that they target. When you look at how to control a mind, understanding the intricacies that go into sneaking into someone’s thoughts, implanting your own, and then escaping without ever raising any red flags, you are learning to really interact with other people. What if you inserted good thoughts that helped people? For the most part, many of the tactics of manipulation are not particularly good for usage outside of controlling people, and the tactics that are being discussed here make particularly potent weapons. While the ones that you find here will largely not be good to use on other people without the intent to completely and utterly control someone else at any cost, you will find more actionable advice in the next few chapters with techniques that are far more target friendly than most of that of manipulation and mind control. Remember, manipulation is a form of influence that is primarily dark. It is primarily designed to be hidden, undetected, and drastic, and that is exactly what you will see here. You will be provided with a guide to the most insidious of the manipulator’s weapons here, from mind control to figuring out how to isolate people. Mind Control with Implanted Ideas Ultimately, mind control is the ability to remove free will—you are effectively systematically entering the mind of someone else in an effort to get them to think or behave in a different manner than they have been. You may be trying to convince someone of something such as to change religions or to join a cult, or you could be simply trying to get your best friend to agree that the band that you want to go see next weekend is actually great, despite the friend hating them. It is important to note before beginning that there is an important distinction between mind control and brainwashing—mind control is far more covert, whereas, in brainwashing, the prisoner or person being brainwashed is aware of it. When someone is using mind control, they are befriending the person, earning a position of trust, and using that trust in order to infiltrate the mind of someone else in order to create a brand new personality type altogether. Effectively, then, this leads to several thoughts implanted in the individual’s mind without the individual knowing where they came from. If done successfully, there should be no way to really discern the thoughts from those that were implanted unnaturally. Mind control starts with the development of a relationship first and foremost. When that relationship is developed, the manipulator is able to get access to the other person’s mind. Of course, this takes time. The manipulator has to wait patiently for the victim to open up and render him or herself vulnerable. However, as soon as that relationship is built up, the manipulator can begin to take advantage. The manipulator can make it a point to engage in talking about topics, dropping just the right amount of hints to begin to infiltrate the mind of the other person. For example, if you really want your friend to like your music, you can spend the time to tell him how great the band is. The next day, subtly mention something about the band. Continue to do this, and after a while of hearing the same idea over and over again, the unconscious mind becomes more impressionable. You may then decide to play the music after a week or two of repeating that they are so great to your friend and find that your friend is super into the music. He may even ask you what the band is because it sounds so great. That is when you can drop it on him that he has been listening to that one particular band that you wanted to go see, and you can ask him to go with you. Using Mind Control 3 Impl Build Lower self mpana SSE Shea thoughts ‘ repetition) Effectively, mind control will come with several steps that you must complete in order to be effective. You must first develop enough of a rapport with the other person to be a trusted individual. This is the part that takes the longest. The more genuine you can make the relationship seem, the more potent your skills will become. This means then that if you want to use this technique, you need to be in it for the long haul. Think about how so many manipulators make it a point to rush through the honeymoon stages at all costs—this is because they desperately want to be in that familiar, trusted position of power with the other party. When they are, they are effectively able to start working on the manipulation side quicker. Since people that are trusting of the manipulator are more susceptible to long term manipulation, this is a preferred method. Upon becoming trusted, you must begin to lower the other person’s self esteem somehow. People with higher self esteem are harder to control just because they are too trusting of themselves. If you want to take out someone’s self esteem, you must lead them to think that they should not trust themselves. You want them to feel like their own thoughts are inaccurate or not true to reality. You may find ways to subtly imply that the other person is not particularly intelligent, skilled, or otherwise capable in an attempt to make them feel like they should not even bother trying. As self esteem lowers, you should have an easier time starting to implant your own thoughts into the mind of the other person. You may want the other person to actively associate a specific emotion with a certain consequence, and you can do that. You can condition the other person at this stage as well, using what is commonly referred to as NLP anchoring, which will be discussed more in Chapter 8. After repetition of the thoughts that you wish to install, you may see them beginning to take hold. Your friend may readily listen to that music that he hated before. The person that you were trying to make more agreeable to have a better shot at dating is beginning to feel more self conscious and therefore far more susceptible to any attention. You may decide to install multiple thoughts or triggers to allow you to better control the other person. No matter the techniques that you chose, one thing is for sure—when you learn how to control the minds of other people, you learn how to take control of who they are. You can implant new interests. You can teach them to be loyal to you. You can convince them that they have always been interested in certain political affiliations. You can change who they are entirely, and they will have no idea how it happens. Effectively, you expose the other person to these changes so slowly over such as a long period of time that they believe that the changes in their thoughts are their own choices. Gaslighting Gaslighting is one of the more dangerous tactics that those with dark personalities employ. After all, what could possibly be more insidious than teaching someone that they cannot rely on who they are as an individual? When you are gaslighting someone, you are effectively teaching someone to doubt their own sanity. Have you ever found yourself in such a moment of self doubt? Have you ever found yourself crippled into inaction because you cannot be sure if things happened the way you believe they happened or if you are overreacting? Maybe you tell yourself you are imagining the way an interaction went, or you think that there is no way possible that things happened the way you think they did. The manipulator wants to latch on to any doubt that you may have and take advantage of it. Over time, the manipulator can effectively make that wound of self doubt fester and grow, slowly consuming your ability to trust yourself and eroding it away into nearly nothing. This process is incredibly dangerous—someone who cannot trust himself is not going to be particularly effective in dealing with other people. Think back to Anna—when she first started seeing signs of Ethan being someone, she thought he wasn’t, she asked him about it. “Why are you so grumpy now?” she may have asked at one point, only to be met with a quizzical look and a quiet response of, “What are you talking about?” Being met with something without aggressiveness, attention, or frustration is enough for Anna to wonder if it was all in her head. Along with those occasional attempts to derail her, he may also move her keys. Never far or hiding them entirely—but he would shift them from the pants she had worn that day to a pair that she had washed earlier in the evening, only to toss that same pair of pants back in the dirty laundry pile. She will go hunting for her keys, only to have Ethan say he thinks they are in the laundry and have her find the pants that she could have sworn she had hung up just hours earlier. He may quietly correct her when she tells a story, reminding her that the detail went a different way than she is reporting it. Did the story actually go that way? Probably not—but he is trying to discredit her in her own mind. That is all gaslighting is—it is a pervasive discrediting of the victim’s own trust in reality. Over time, the idea that Anna internalizes is that she is incapable of actually ever trusting herself. If she is ever asked anything, she is quick to defer to Ethan because she has taught herself that she is untrustworthy. This means that Ethan’s control over her increases as he continues to tighten his grip. In order to use this technique for yourself, you would simply start by discrediting something particularly harmless. You may move keys or check the mail early and pretend that your partner had checked it when they hadn’t. You may make it a point to tell your partner that the oven was left on when it wasn’t and more. Over time, you slowly up the ante. Over time, the stakes of whatever is going on increase more and more. You point out that your partner is driving to the wrong store and that you are going to one on the opposite side of town when your partner turns into the store you had agreed to go to. You may tell your partner that she forgot to pay all of her bills and that you paid them all for her, even though she was up late the night before doing so. Eventually, gaslighting gets so incredibly powerful that the victim could see a car go by and then you could deny that it had ever gone by. The victim would be willing to accept that as the truth simply because she has lost faith in herself. Isolation Another common manipulation tactic is isolation. People are social creatures—we are primarily happier and more fulfilled when we have some sort of interaction and relationships with other people. However, manipulators frequently find themselves feeling threatened by the idea of their victims having inner circles of friends and family members that cannot be controlled. The manipulator wants to retain full control of the victim, and as such, it becomes common to isolate the victim away from everyone else he or she ever knew and loved. It may start out as simple as voicing a displeasure about certain friends or family members. Over time, it may strengthen into something far worse— the individual may find that it is easier to cut off friends than it is to deal with the jealousy or pushback. The manipulator may make up stories about particularly problematic members of the victim’s inner circle, such as declaring that the best friend of the victim has been trash talking the manipulator for the last week, even though the poor manipulator has done nothing wrong. Over time, the victim internalizes all of this—the victim begins to internalize this. If you are constantly told that the only person that could ever love you is a person that has been abusive to you for years, you may begin to believe that. If the manipulator plays his cards right, he becomes the only circle of support for the victim. This is intentional—if only the partner or spouse works, the victim is stuck at home with the children simply due to the prohibitive cost of childcare. If the victim wants to go out, there are always a million reasons why that cannot happen. Ultimately, the end result is the same—little to no support for the victim. Without support, the victim has no one to help. Moving out can be intimidating, or even just impossible depending on the situation. Isolating people is commonly done by making problems between the victim and those around him or her that the manipulator has facilitated. He may make it a point to call out the victim, telling her that she cannot possibly go out with those people because they are too promiscuous. The next time that they are going to a bachelorette party and I was told, “Oh, you know what? I feel really sick, and you’re going to need to take care of the baby.” There is always a reason, and over time, the individual victim loses credibility. Criticism Remember how a basic tenet of being able to control the mind of someone else was being able to damage their self esteem? This is where you begin to do that. You are effectively going to be attempting to damage the other person’s self esteem so much that they do not want to make choices for themselves. The criticism that you shower them in is enough to deter any decision making. When you want to criticize someone else, you need to figure out what their true weaknesses are. If they are commonly threatened by the idea of being a bad parent, you may latch onto that, throwing it in the victim’s face as much as possible. If you are working on a big project for school to get your master’s degree, you may find that your partner is suddenly telling you how dumb or stupid you are and that you will never make it. You may find that actually being able to proceed is next to impossible if you feel strongly and regularly criticized. The more criticized that you feel as well, the more likely that it is that you will fail. You will be distracted and all of your attempts to actually do better will likely suffer as well. When you are too busy or too afraid to take the leap in order to actually be successful. Your distraction will potentially cost you your degree, and that is exactly what the manipulator wants. The manipulator wants you to feel like being successful is an impossibility, because if you believe that it san impossibility, you will not try to leave. That means effectively, you are self sabotaging without ever realizing it, all because of the constant criticism fed to you. Think back to Anna for a moment. Ethan criticized her regularly later in the relationship after having originally gotten Anna in the first place. He chose to behave poorly, telling Anna that she could never get the house clean like he expected, even though he is home all evening without helping. She is constantly asked why she cannot do anything right despite her best efforts, and over time, that critical worldview becomes her own. All that needed to happen was that Anna was repeatedly and ruthlessly exposed to the same manipulative propaganda over and over again reminding her of just how worthless she truly was. Now, was Anna particularly useless? Not at all—she has taken care of her child and also managed to work on school. However, she was not living up to Ethan’s impossible standards and he was not afraid to make her pay for it with his criticisms and sharp words. Fatigue Finally, the last manipulation tactic that we will discuss is fatigue. Have you ever felt so tired that you were convinced that you would drop dead or pass out at any point in time? Perhaps you stayed up extra late working on a project and never got to sleep overnight. Or maybe you had young children that woke up around the clock, indoctrinating you to the lack of sleep club that every young parent is introduced to. No matter the cause, think about how you felt after not getting enough sleep. You probably felt like you were lagging and like you could not think clearly. Despite all of the coffee that you had chugged throughout the day, you could not help but feel like you were ready to collapse soon. You found that you were far more ready to just go along with what your partner was telling you—if he says that you need to run to the store to buy something, you are willing to do so. If he decides that you need to clean up, you begrudgingly get up and do it in your half asleep state. The reason that this happens is that over time, as you become more and more exhausted, your mind’s own mechanisms of being able to fight such influences begin to wane. It cannot defend itself if it is too exhausted to function, effectively. Instead, those safety mechanisms, or at least, the primary ones within your mind, malfunction. Instead of being able to fight back, you find that you simply agree because it is easier. You do not see the battle as being worth the little effort, so you agree. Fatigue is a commonly used tactic afros the board. It has been used to torture people into spilling information before. The studies of the brain have shown that as soon as you have been kept up for just 20 hours, you are already just as impaired as if you had drunk a beer or two instead. You need to be able to rest to keep your mind sharp so you can protect your body. When you are sleep deprived, then, you are susceptible to all sorts of dangerous and insidious abuse. All you have to do to make someone sleep deprived is actively prevent them from sleeping as long as you can. Try to find techniques that can be brushed off as being some sort of coincidence rather than intentional. You may turn on a light and then apologize and say you thought the other person was sleeping. Dose the other person with caffeine. Convince the other person to stay up late with you for some reason—perhaps you will be watching a movie together or something. Ultimately, no matter the method that you choose, you will find that you are able to gain covert control over the mind of others if you were to utilize the tactics within a relationship or with someone else. You can weaken the mind’s defenses. You can slip past them entirely undetected. You can convince people to believe false realities and more. The power of mind control is very real, but please remember that it is a dangerous ability that should not be taken lightly. Chapter 5: The Power of Persuasion Persuasion is incredibly powerful. When you can persuade someone to do something, you can usually get them to agree with whatever it is that you want them to do. If you want to get someone to go on a date with you, you can persuade them to do so. If you want someone to hire them, you want to be able to convince them that you deserve to be hired in the first place. If you want someone to help you, you want to persuade them. Persuasion occurs in nearly every aspect of life. It will be a prevalent aspect of nearly every interaction that you have with other people. So much as just suggesting to someone that you would like to go somewhere is a form of persuasion—it is the attempt to socially influence. This means that you are trying to get someone else to do something else, changing their behaviors in some way. When you can persuade someone else to do something, you have changed their behavior in a way that did not involve coercion or forcing them somehow. You effectively managed to convince them in a way that showed them exactly why you are right. Now, whether the method that you used was emotional versus being a legitimate attempt to logically convince someone else is up for debate, depending upon whether you feel that emotions are a valid justification method to use to convince someone else. As you read this far, you may have questions: What specifically is persuasion when referring to it in a psychological manner? How can you truly be persuasive? Why does it matter? Are there specific methods that usually or always work? Why do they work? It is normal to have these questions going through your mind. After all, if you now know that you can persuade people to do nearly anything, you may be wondering exactly how that persuasion can happen, and possibly even whether it is happening to you. The good news is that persuasion, specifically compared to manipulation, honors free will. This means that any attempts to persuade you are not necessarily coercive or threatening in any way. Instead, they will place a particular emphasis on truly wanting the other person to arrive at the solution on their own. That is what makes persuasion so effective—it is guiding the other person to make a decision. What is Persuasion? By definition, persuasion is an attempt to change either attitudes or behavior without duress. The persuasion usually comes in some sort of communication. Keep in mind that many different aspects interfere with behavior and attitude, which is why you can have some influential techniques such as brainwashing or mind control, but then also have persuasion. All are different forms of influence, and they all work in different manners. Keep in mind that not all communication is persuasive: In fact, you usually communicate for one of three reasons. These reasons are to persuade, to inform, or to entertain. Sometimes, you can sort of blur the lines between the two, such as using the information to persuade or persuading someone through humor to make the other person like you more. However, persuasion is its own distinct form of communication that should be treated as such. Consider for a moment that you want to convince your spouse to agree to take your annual vacation to Hawaii this year. You may be entirely determined to go to Hawaii, but you know that your partner prefers to go places that are far cooler. Keeping that in mind, you offer up all of the reasons that you would like to go. You inform your partner that you would like to get the sunlight to boost your vitamin D. You tell your partner that you have always wanted to go to Hawaii, or that you know that it is beautiful at that point in time. Your spouse eventually relents, though you know that your spouse is not going to be particularly happy on the trip. Is this a form of manipulation or persuasion? The answer is persuasion—there were no threats. There were no attempts to hide information. You were entirely forthcoming with everything, including what you were trying to do. Manipulation usually involves some sort of deception and covertness that you did not use when talking about Hawaii. You were not dropping constant subtle messages in hopes of subliminally communicating with your partner—you simply had an adult conversation with your partner about why you wanted to go to Hawaii, and your spouse loves you enough to agree, even if that means sacrificing what your spouse wants to do the most. This is normal persuasion and shows a normal sort of give and take in a relationship. The normalcy of this persuasion would be further emphasized if, the next time you are going on vacation, you consider what your partner wants over what you want yourself. Persuasion, then, becomes a valuable tool in many different contexts. It is critical in attempts to communicate with other people in order to get what you wanted or needed. It is beneficial when you are actively attempting to convince other people what you would like to do. It helps you lead people toward decisions that you believe will be helpful to them, such as if you are a leader that needs to be able to manage the abilities and actions of other people. When you are going to be persuading other people, you are going to be helping them make decisions, and this makes it powerful in advertising in particular. In fact, persuasion is so readily recognized that the study of it links back to the Middle Ages: Rhetoric, which you will be discussing shortly, was commonly used and taught in the university, and was taught to anyone who sought to become educated. Now, without further ado, let us look at two of the most common sets of persuasive techniques that you can find when you are trying to learn how to convince other people of nearly anything at all: the principles of persuasion and the art of rhetoric. Principles of Persuasion The principles of persuasion are commonly used, and you may even find that you actively use them without ever being aware of it. These are six common techniques that can be used in order to directly or subtly guide the thoughts of someone else in order to ensure that their thoughts align with what you want to push. This is not manipulative—it is taking advantage of psychology in ways that can be persuasive and convincing to nearly anyone. If the other person naturally makes the decision that they are inclined to make after hearing the persuasion, that is not an act of coercion and should be treated accordingly. When you are looking at the principles of persuasion, you are looking at six distinct techniques that can be used to persuade. These are social proof, reciprocity, commitment and consistency, authority, scarcity, and liking something or someone. These techniques can be incredibly convincing if you know how to use them effectively. At this point, it is time to delve into each of these techniques. You will be guided through what the technique is as well as how to use it, with a short example for each of the six. Reciprocity Cammitment and consistency Social proof of pg Authority Scarcity Authority Stop and consider for a moment: You have just gotten to your family’s holiday gettogether. You brought with you your favorite mayonnaise based food, but in the rush and business of the kitchen, you realized that your dish got left out on the counter. You got to the meal at noon, and you realized that the food was still out at 5:30 when it was time to eat. Your great aunt is telling you that the food is safe, and everyone will be fine if they eat it. Your brother, who is a professional chef, on the other hand, insists that it be thrown out because it not only sat out in a hot kitchen for 5.5 hours, but also however long it took you to get from your home to the potluck. Who do you believe? Naturally, you are going to lean toward believing the chef, who works with food on a daily basis and is up to date on the most current food safety rules. You are going to be inclined to believe the individual who has had to pass classes on food safety simply because you trust him more on matters like this. Have you ever stopped to consider why you would? The answer is simple: You view him on an authority when it comes to food. This is only natural—after all, he is a chef. In general, people tend to believe the people that they believe to be authority figures. While your great aunt may have been an authority figure in your life at some point, you also recognize that she has a tendency to hoard and has a hard time throwing away any consumable, even if the use by date has come and gone. Effectively, you do not trust her to be an authority on food. This is one of the simplest uses of the principles of persuasion: if you want to be persuasive, you need to make sure that you are an authority in some way. People are naturally more inclined to agree with an authority over someone who they do not see as particularly knowledgeable. This is natural —we tend to defer to people that we believe know what they are doing. This is exactly why we take the advice of doctors, lawyers, and mechanics around the world: We trust that they know what we do not, and most of the time, this is true. ae eet | — Scarcity Imagine that, at that holiday dinner, you all realize that someone has lost one of the pies that were brought for dessert. When dessert rolls around, you all realize that there is not enough pie to go around, even if you were to cut pieces into small amounts. Everyone would, at best, get a sliver of pie without much on their plate because of the lack of the pies that should have been present. Of course, now everyone is vying for one of the pieces of pie. They are suddenly deemed to be far more valuable than they otherwise would have been perceived for one reason: They are scarce. Not everyone can get a piece of pie, or at least, not everyone can get a piece of pie that would be satisfying, and because of that, everyone finds that that the pie must be far more desirable than it otherwise would have been viewed to be. This is the principle of scarcity. When something is in low demand, it is suddenly deemed to be far more valuable. While pie may not be a very high ticket item to use as an example, the point still stands: The less is there, the more it is wanted. Consider instead that you are a car salesperson. You need to be able to sell this car in order to get a bonus the following month, which is where you make most of your money. Now, imagine that the person that you are talking to does not seem convinced. They seem to feel like making a higher down payment is in their best interest, which it is, practically speaking. However, you really need to land that sale, so you offer a deal. You tell the person buying that if they are willing to buy the car that night, that they will get a steal of a deal—the deal that you are offering, however, expires that night and they need to make a decision sooner rather than later. The added pressure pushes the buyer over the edge from debating it to agreeing to do so for one reason: That deal was made scarce. People are risk aversive. They are far more likely to agree to something with a guaranteed payout than risk not having such a good deal in the future. The act of being able to save money now guaranteed seems far more convincing than potentially saving more money in the long run if they were to wait to have a larger down payment on their car, and they will use that logic to guide their decision. When you want to appeal to scarcity, then, you want to make sure that you make the other person feel like they need to make a decision sooner rather than later. They will usually err on the conservative side and take advantage of the deal presented to them. Social Proof Do you remember how in childhood, you were often told not to do something just because your friends were doing it? It turns out there is a good reason for that suggestion—people are far more likely to make a decision to follow the lead of other people if they do not know what to expect or what to do. In an unfamiliar environment or when under stress, people are more likely to follow the lead of those that they can relate to in some way. This means that if you need to convince or persuade someone to do something, you want to make sure that their peers are available to show them what to do, effectively. Think about the holiday gatherings that you attended as a child: Did you typically copy what the slightly older kids were doing? Did you pick up on their behaviors? People learn through exposure, and that is what makes it so powerful. Think about toddlers who will copy the swear words of their parent, or the preteen who picks up smoking just because their peers are, even if they are not particularly interested in doing so. It is not weakness that makes us do these things, but rather the tendency of people to naturally learn from those around them. Imagine that you are still selling cars. You discover that people are far more likely to agree to something if you tell them that their peers also often agree to buy that one particular car for some reason. If it is a young family, you may point out that many people with young children really like the features such as being able to swing their feet under the license plate to open the trunk, or being able to start their car remotely when they are inside, finishing up the final preparations before leaving, all because it makes life so much more convenient when you are already toting a couple of tiny humans that inherently make everything about travel more difficult. After all, when you are traveling with toddlers, you must consider whether everyone has gone to the bathroom, if they are wearing clothing that is safe in their car seat, whether you have their snacks and toys, as well as a change of clothes present and so much more. You emphasize all of this, and you find that your sales pitches become far more effective in the long run, all because you make it clear that other parents also like cars with those features. Liking Another common usage of persuasion is through the principle of liking someone or something. We naturally tend to be persuaded more by those that we enjoy simply because if we are going to be going through the effort to help someone else, we are going to do it because we genuinely want to help. This means then that if you want to convince someone to help you do something, or to obey what you are suggesting, you want to make yourself likable to you. Making someone like you can happen almost instantly in several fashions. You can make yourself quickly liked through simply making it a point to mirror someone, similar to a technique common to NLP. You can also go through the process of intentionally making someone like you through a three step process. This three step process is quite simple: You must make yourself relatable somehow, you must offer a compliment, and you must make yourself seem like team. This works for several reasons—when you are relatable, you are automatically seen as more human than you were just a moment ago. Consider just how many people you interact with on a regular basis: How many of them are you able to actively remember? Can you remember who helped you at the grocery store, or who you passed by at work? Unless you have some sort of super memory, chances are, you do not remember. However, if you can make yourself relatable somehow, you will be more memorable and more persuasive. Because you see so many people throughout the day, you tend to forget that they are people and not just blurs that you pass. In changing that, you automatically want to give them more Compliment the other Beateam person attention. When you compliment the other person, you make a specific association between yourself and the other person: That you are a source of good feelings. This does begin to toe the line into emotional manipulation for some people—it is intentionally triggering the feelings of very specific feelings for a very specific purpose, and for that reason, you should at least make sure that whatever compliment you offer, it is a legitimate one that you meant. If you did not mean the compliment and only said it to get them to like you, you are likely to do the exact opposite: instead of being seen as likable, you will be seen as manipulative, and poorly so. Finally, you want to establish that you and the other person are a team. In doing so, you trigger that camaraderie that is necessary for successful persuasion. When they feel like you are on the same team, they are far less likely to try to guard against you simply because they do not see you as a threat. Because of this, you then become far more capable of persuasion. Their minds will be more open and accepting because they do not think that you will try to take advantage of them. Now, go back to that example of selling something to someone. Imagine that your next client walks in with a young child in tow. You settle down at your dest to talk to the other person, and in doing so, you offer the child a bucket of toys that you keep in a drawer for just that occasion—you know that children get antsy when stuck at a desk for longer than about 2.5 seconds. You smile as you offer the toys and comment offhandedly that you have a child about that age at home too and that it is always tough to get through appointments, so you have made it a point to have your own toys present just in case. You have now naturally offered a tidbit about yourself, and that has made you more relatable. Next, you wait a bit. After a little while of working, you make a comment about how the child is incredibly well behaved and that the client has done a great job with them. This makes the client feel good and they will be happy. Finally, you point out that you are happy to help them, or you tell them to help you help them. This establishes that teamwork that you need in order to convince them to do what you need. Consistency and Commitment The next principle of persuasion is consistency and commitment—people are usually inclined to remain consistent to their commitments for one reason: Being consistent makes you reliable. People want to be viewed as reliable because being reliable is powerful—it is valued greatly and if you can make people see you as reliable, they will continue to go back to you. If you are a reliable salesperson, for example, other people will repeatedly go back to you to make their purchases because they trust you. If you reliably pay back your loans, your credit goes up and people are more likely to give you loans in the future as well. Because people want to be reliable, they will usually follow the same pattern of answering and offering to help over and over again. For example, if you ask your best friend to babysit your kids one night for the weekend and they agree, you may find that they are more likely to continue to babysit your kids regularly every weekend because they have already agreed to do so once, and they want to continue to agree in order to be seen as consistent. They will then continue to babysit when asked because they do not see it as a strain or as a problem. Eventually, however, it seems less like occasional childcare and more like it is happening daily and must continue. That friend is going to likely continue to babysit without a complaint until it becomes a problem because they want to be consistent. All you need to do to take advantage of this principle is get someone to agree with you on one point before asking for something else. A common tactic for this is to ask someone for a pen to get them into a mindset of saying yes instead of no, and they are more likely to continue to say yes in the future. Reciprocity Finally, the last principle of persuasion is reciprocity. To understand this principle, imagine how you feel obligated to offer someone else something in return after they have given you something. If someone offers to help you, you try to reciprocate in some way. For example, if your friend gives you a birthday present, you feel like you are inclined to offer them a present in return on their birthday as well. This works for a very specific reason: People are inherently hardwired to want to return the acts of altruism for them. Did your friend giving you something or helping you actually benefit them in any way other than to make them happy? Chances are, it did not, but them giving to you in the first place can be enough to get you to continue to give to them in the future. Effectively, they guarantee that you will make it a point to provide for them if they were to need it because they have given to you. When you want to use the art of reciprocation, think not what they can do for you, but rather what you can do for them. Ask what they need you to do before you go making demands and you may be surprised to see the result. Rhetoric Another line of thoughts surrounding the art of persuasion is rhetoric. This is literally the art of being persuasive in the first place, and if you can master this, you will be able to use these tools in general conversation. These techniques have been passed down since the middle ages, and if they have continued to be relevant, then they must be useful, at least in some Capacity or another. Ultimately, rhetoric has several requirements. You must be able to control language and know the culture within which you are working. Further, you must understand the rhetorical situation, which will determine what you are trying to do, your audience, the topic, how you will speak, and context. This all combines together to create the rhetoric that you will be discussing. The purpose for your situation will be acknowledging why you are writing or talking. What are you trying to do? Then, you must figure out what you are discussing—the topic. This should determine what you are trying to inform or persuade about. You should be broad enough to be able to work with this, while also being narrow enough that you have a very specific purpose in doing so. Next, you must look into the audience—the person that you are addressing. You may find that this is the hardest to work with, as you will not be able to fully control the audience. You cannot possibly get everyone to do what you want on a whim, and because of that, you need to do your best to work with the audience that you have rather than the one you want. Finally, you have the writer: This is the person doing the persuasion. What are you bringing to the table? Why are you discussing what you are discussing? How is it relevant to you? With the situation identified, you are free to begin addressing the three appeals of rhetoric: Logos, Ethos, and Pathos. Logos Logis is an appeal to logic. At its simplest, it is figuring out how to convince your audience that there is no other option but to agree with you on what you are saying. Oftentimes, this takes advantage of statistics or other facts in order to get the point across. You want to make an argument that is so strong, the audience feels no choice but to agree with it. For example, imagine that you are trying to persuade someone to buy that car you were really pushing for. At this point, you begin talking about all of the statistics that mean that the car that you are discussing is safer. You may pull up crash ratings, or how statistically they save more on gas than compared to other cars. You are trying to bombard the other person with so much information that it is undeniable—the best option available is to buy the car, regardless of personal opinion. Ethos Ethos is an appeal to character. Unlike an appeal to logic, you are trying to make yourself sound persuasive and trustworthy. In advertisement, consider the fact that people tend to use celebrities in order to win people over. If you see your favorite celebrity, who you personally admire, drinking a certain type of coffee or wearing a certain kind of shoe, you are going to feel more inclined to do the same simply because you want to identify with that celebrity. You may also do this to show that you are trustworthy on a science— perhaps you make it clear that you have spent your entire life focusing on that one particular study that you have finally accomplished. Emphasizing that trustworthiness is a great way to make sure that other people will be willing to listen to you as you talk. Think of this as using an appeal to authority—you are listing out anything about yourself that will make you seem trustworthy and worthy of being Pathos Finally, the last of the appeals of rhetoric is Pathos: An appeal to emotion. When you are using an appeal to emotion, you are using emotion to drive the individual forward. You want to make an emotional connection of some way to actually get the audience to feel what you want them to feel.! When you are able to claim and use their emotions, you will find that you are able to convince them to do something. This is for one specific reason: your emotions are meant to be motivating. When you can use the emotions of other people, you can compel them to do a lot. For example, if you are needing to get people to donate to your cause, you mention some of the people that your cause will be helping. Perhaps you tell success stories of people that have been helped by your foundation. When you do this, people feel moved to act. When you want to use pathos, you want to make sure that you identify the emotional response that you want to take advantage of, and then you figure out how best to trigger that emotional response in the other party. Doing so can usually get the other person to do what you are aiming for. Think of how commercials for charities will use photos of starving children and puppies and kittens that look miserable. This is because these pictures are sadness evoking—they will trigger the individual to feel sad, and in feeling sad, they can call for those donations that they want to see. Chapter 6: Brainwashing Have you ever wondered why brainwashing got so popular in media? You may see it in cartoons or as the plot point to an incredibly popular movie or book for adults. It seems like it is commonly used as a device to scare those that are consuming the media, as a sort of creepy, grotesque attempt to make them feel compelled to keep reading while also being terrified. While the concept of brainwashing is nowhere near as grotesque as it can become in entertainment, sometimes involving serums, spells being cast, possession, or other such tactics, it is still a very real occurrence in psychology. In particular, brainwashing is commonly seen in situations such as cults and prisoners of war. This is not the kind of sudden triggering of perfect obedience that it may seem to be in media, but rather something brutal and traumatizing. As you read through this chapter, keep in mind that brainwashing is not something that should be treated lightly. This is one of the most insidious methods of control over someone else simply due to the harm that it can trigger. If you are attempting to brainwash someone, you must remember that the only ways that can utilize this technique are largely abusive and sometimes illegal. If you choose to utilize these methods, you are acknowledging that you are taking that risk for yourself. It is strongly recommended that you avoid these techniques but understanding how it works is still something that is important. What is Brainwashing? Brainwashing itself has a definition of creating new beliefs within someone else that are typically radically different from the original ones. These techniques almost always involve the use of coercion. If you were to simplify this definition, you would say that it is the act of forcing people to comply and internalize a new internal belief system through coercion. The entire purpose of this technique is entirely to force people to change. It involves the act of attacking someone else’s identity so thoroughly that you are eventually able to systematically erase or repress it. This almost always requires some level of traumatic abuse and guilt over an extended period of time in order to truly get it to work. This is precisely why you should avoid ever using this against other people—you would effectively be intentionally and maliciously destroying a person’s very being in order to create your own identity for that person. That is so incredibly harmful, and you should make it a point to ensure that it does not happen. + S S Why Brainwash? Brainwashing happens for several reasons. People will use the art of brainwashing in order to indoctrinate people into cults. Typically, these dark cults demand complete and utter obedience, and if you cannot gain absolute control over someone, you are usually going to have a hard time getting people to stick around long enough to actually actively be abused in any way. In particular, one of the most well known abusive cults that had brainwashed and completely indoctrinated the members was the cult of Jim Jones—he convinced his entire cult to drink cyanide and kill themselves and their children. Other times, it is commonly used during war—when militaries take prisoners of war, they may intentionally brainwash them in an attempt to get the people to break down and obey under any and all situations. For example, during the 1950s, the Chinese made it a point to subject several American soldiers to their processes of brainwashing before sending them back to the US. The people then completely denounced their own cultures and personalities, touting the importance and benefits of the world in China. Even more often, you can see brainwashing in cultures such as North Korea, through propaganda and attempts to keep everyone involved compliant and willing to obey. When these people are subjected to constant abuse with constant feedback about how their leader is the best leader and that they must be perfectly obedient, they develop those beliefs as their Own. What is important to note here is that these brainwashing attempts are not hidden—the people involved will be entirely aware of what is happening to them. However, what is unique is the fact that they still comply anyway. By and large, when people do know that they are being coerced or manipulated, they are usually able to distance themselves from it. This is not the case with brainwashing—the new identity is typically taken simply because the individual wants to stop some sort of egregious abuse that is happening that is too painful or too much to bear. Rather than continuing to suffer, the individual instead makes it a point to give in, allowing for the creation of the new personality simply for survival. This however also adds one extra facet—you can reverse brainwashing, though the guilt will remain. Prisoners exposed to this sort of abuse do eventually revert back to more or less who they were before—they may be terrified of their identity at first, but over time, they become more and more willing to accept who they are as an individual and renounce that old personality created in brainwashing. Steps to Brainwashing Despite the fact that the art of brainwashing is so incredibly insidious, if you are able to take advantage of this process, you will find that it is far easier than it seems. It does not take much to entirely break down a person’s mind, so long as you have no qualms about utterly decimating the personality of someone else. If you are not afraid of destroying someone else, you will find that with just a handful of steps, that person can be destroyed and brainwashed. Of course, that does not mean that it is a quick process—it does take a significant amount of time to truly dismantle the mind of someone else. You will need to have the time, space, and blatant disregard for the law and other human life to take advantage of this Assault on ra s TARO eal Guilt Self betrayal identity technique. Leniency Breaking point Final confession Brainwashing is impossible if the individual that is being brainwashed is Assault on Identity not willing to let go of who they are as a person. This means that the first stage of brainwashing is convincing them that they should not like the person that they are. In particular, you will spend time assaulting their identity in hopes of convincing them that their identity is problematic in some way. Effectively, you want to make them fear who they are and everything they value. For example, you may ask someone what their name is. If they answer with their name, you punish them severely and tell them that their name is something else. For example, imagine that the person’s name is Bill. He tells you that, and in response, you brutally beat him across the back with a board and then tell him that his name is Larry now. Every time that you ask him about his past, his identity, or anything else close to him and he answer truthfully, you would then beat him in order to make him fear the truth. You are effectively teaching him to fear the act of being honest with other people about who he is and because he does fear it, he is not likely to continue to repeat the mistake over and over. Guilt Next, it is time to instill guilt. As the other person is constantly being penalized for who they are, they effectively must be convinced that the abuse is their own fault. Maybe it was a fault of their culture or their family, or it was simply them as a person. You want them to effectively feel like they are responsible for their beatings and imprisonment, and you will get this through repetition. You will add more onto their plate as well—you may blame them for the fact that it is not sunny that day, or that something unrelated to him has happened. You want to lay on as much guilt as possible so the individual rejects themselves in favor of being able to reject the guilt. Self Betrayal Soon, the guilt will build up, as will the fear of torture if they continue to stand by who they are, and the individuals being brainwashed will find that it is easier to simply betray their identities than it is to stay true to themselves. They decide that they would rather break away from who they are as people in order to protect their lives, as they have reached a point of knowing that death will arrive if they are not careful. They would rather betray themselves, satisfying the fact that they need to survive, and they obey and submit. Breaking Point Upon denouncement of who they were as a person, the people being brainwashed find that they have hit their breaking point—they feel like they have lost all hope. They have accepted their new life and know that fighting back is futile. This is the beginning of the adoption of the new life that has been presented to them, as at that point, to the one being brainwashed, the choices are to assimilate or die, and they have already rejected who they once were. They officially give up at this stage and recognize that they will have no choice but to accept the new thoughts or cultures if they wish to survive. Leniency Next comes a ray of hope—someone that has been torturing the person being brainwashed to the brink of death, when he feels like he cannot possibly cope any longer, offers some sort of leniency. It may be a bit extra food, or a cigarette, or even just a kind word. It is then that hope is dangled in front of the individual and is seen as a legitimate option. The individual will latch onto that trust, seeing it as proof that they can, in fact, survive, if they play their cards right, and they latch onto that. The manipulator has officially won the trust of the one being brainwashed, and they begin to accept that all of the pain of torture will go away as soon as they are willing to give in and comply entirely. Compulsion to Confess At this point, the guilt becomes too unbearable for the individual—he feels like he cannot hold it in any longer and he feels that the only option is confession. He is driven to let go of that previous life and let’s go of it all. The manipulator, of course, encourages this, and soon, confessions are flying for anything possible. Even things that are not the fault of the brainwashed are confessed for in order to let go of all of that guilt. Progress and Harmony After that initial confession, the individual is slowly taught and assimilated. This stage is the education of the new identity and culture. People are encouraged to let go of the past. They agree to go along with what they are being taught out of fear of being returned to the past, in which they are treated poorly. Instead, they are given many basic human decencies to encourage them to continue to make their positive progress in their life. Final Confession Eventually comes the final confession—this is the stage at which they finally give up who they are for real. They are willing to renounce it all, seeing the beauty in what they have been taught and finding that they identify with the culture that has taken them in. They are willing to continue to coexist in this new social bubble and are willing to get in as soon as possible. Rebirth Finally comes the rebirth—at this stage, the prisoners are released. They are no longer being manipulated, simply because they already have been. Instead, they are indoctrinated and welcomed into the new society. While they are usually eager to get involved with the new life and the new people, they may be met with hesitation as people still see them as betrayers and foreigners. There is no amount of naming and ceremony, after all, that would allow the general population in that new circle to accept that they are the new person. Despite all of the effort that went into brainwashing, the general public still wishes to keep their distance, leaving the brainwashed remaining just as isolated as before. Chapter 7: Deception Have you ever felt the pressing need to lie to someone? Perhaps you felt like someone in your inner circle was actively lying to you, but you lacked the evidence that you needed to prove it beyond that sneaking suspicion that whatever was being said was a lie. No matter how certain you were, no one believed you and you were brushed off as being too sensitive or paranoid. What if you could develop the ability to identify the signs of that deception so you could call it out in the moment? Any time that you had those gut feelings that something was wrong, you would be able to point out exactly what it was that caused it. You would be able to tell exactly when you were lied to, in order to point out to yourself that you were not, in fact, crazy. You can end the constant self gaslighting and instead work to eliminate the deceivers that are hiding behind their masks, presenting you with one thing while actually intending something entirely different. What if you wanted to be deceptive? Sometimes, there is a good reason to be, even if it is not always the most ethical option. Sometimes, it is a good thing to convince someone else of something that is untrue, such as if you want to surprise someone for their birthday. If you want to surprise them, you can make it a point to know exactly how to skirt around the truth to keep that surprise under wraps until the big day. Keep in mind that while this chapter discusses deception in depth, it should never be used nefariously. It is incredibly unethical to be lying about what is happening or why it is occurring, and the information provided here is for informative purposes only in order to aid in the identification of lying. There is no condoning of deception. Defining Deception Deception itself is a form of distorting the truth in some way. The truth is often dramatized, avoided, or simply lied about to convince the other person of what is being said, and in doing so, some sort of lie or deception is used to disguise it. It can range from deliberately avoiding answering the question or distracting from the question at hand, such as answering a question with another question, and then answering that question. It could be deliberately misconstruing the truth somehow, such as reporting causation as correlation despite not having the evidence to support that claim. It could even be simply saying something that is patently untrue. What is true, however, is that deception is wrong. It can even be illegal in several instances, such as in false advertising. If you are deceiving others, you are putting not only yourself, but also other people, at risk. Despite the unethicality of deception as a general rule, it is used in several different contexts on a regular basis. It is regularly used in order to win favor, such as in politics, for example. In particular, in politics, politicians will regularly use ambiguity to avoid truly answering the question at hand when they know that the answer to the question will be condemning in some way, shape, or form. Sometimes, people lie for abusive purposes. People like the narcissist will lie about who they are as a person in order to win favor from their targets with ease. They will pretend to be someone that they are not solely because they know that it will help them in the long run. If they pretend to be someone else, they are certain that they will actually attract the person in, and they can continue to lie about who they are. They effectively create a mask to wear to help themselves become the person that they need to be. Other times, people use deception to hide something, such as making sure that their partners do not find out that they are cheating on them. Ultimately, people will lie if they think that it will benefit them. Despite the fact that so many people are so willing to lie, it does not come as naturally as one may think. Lying actually puts a huge strain on the individual at hand. When you lie, your body is unhappy— it naturally releases stress hormones, and it changes how body language is presented. This means that if you are able to read those changes in behavior and state of mind, you can start to figure out whether someone is lying or not at a glance. Types of Deception Deception comes in several forms, depending upon how the individual needs to lie in the first place and what the truth that is being hidden is. Ultimately, people will use whatever method works best for them, but at the end of the day, there are several different forms that deception can take. These forms are important to understand in order to both recognize the deception as it happens, and also how to use deception as well. As you read through the next several sections, keep in mind that you can use these techniques yourself if you are truly certain that you would like to make use of the deceptive powers that are shown to you. Lying Perhaps the most well known form of deception is lying. When someone thinks of someone else deceiving them, it is usually some sort of lie meant to mislead someone. This is also the most blatant destruction of the truth. It is the creation of a new sort of truth altogether—when you lie to someone, you are creating a new narrative with a new truth that may or may not even resemble the truth by the time it is spoken. When you are lying, you are literally making something new up that is unrelated to the truth. It is as simple as coming up with something new to tell the other person. For example, imagine that you really want to go hang out with your best friend who happens to be someone your partner is very insecure about. You may tell your partner that you are going to the movies with a completely different friend altogether to have an excuse to get out of the house during the period of time that you will be with the friend that you know your partner would be upset about. You have told a blatant lie in order to avoid the fight that you know would otherwise arise. Equivocation Equivocation occurs when you make your answers vague intentionally. You are intentionally hoping that the other person will be so thrown off track by the answers that you give that the truth will be ignored. This is commonly used in politics in particular, in which the politician may answer an entirely different question with wording that is just ambiguous enough to sort of give the impression of giving the most favorable answer possible without ever committing to that one particular answer. It is secretive in an entirely different manner when compared to lying. For example, imagine that you tell your partner that you are going out for the night. Your partner then, naturally, asks you where you are going. You say that you are going to watch a movie with a friend and leave it at that as you walk ou the door. Your partner may think that you meant going to the movie theater with someone, when in reality, you are going to that one person’s house that makes your partner self conscious and nervous. You will still put on a movie at some point, so you are not lying, as you went to watch a movie with a friend, but you were not forthcoming with pertinent information that likely would have raised red flags for your partner. Omission Omission is the act of deliberately leaving out pertinent information that should have been included in the original statement. It is designed to hope that the individual does not press on that one particular issue in the hopes that the person will instead focus on what was said instead of wondering what went unsaid altogether. Omissions are dangerous because not every person is going to think to probe every line of questioning that needs to happen. Most people will simply take things at face value, and that is exactly what this person is hoping will happen. When information is taken at face value, the end result is the deception going entirely unchallenged, meaning that it was successful. Of course, it is always possible that the other person will probe, meaning you would need to segue into another form of deception as well. For example, the example for equivocation still counts for omission as well. Not only is the information that was offered ambiguous, it was also incomplete, leaving a massive hole to fill in. This is what makes it a lie by omission—the left out information would have been pertinent to making a properly informed decision at the end of the day. Overstatements Sometimes, people use overstatements in ways that are intended to be comical—they are tongue in cheek attempts to make fun of oneself and are used specifically for fun. For example, someone may say that they were dying after that long workout. Were they really dying? Nope—they added it for dramatic flair, despite the fact that it is untrue. However, sometimes, the overstatement is used in ways that are meant to be deceptive. Typically, these deceptions are meant to play the victim or martyr—the individual makes it sound like they did far more than was asked of them and far more than was intended, and after that, they felt the need to go out of their way to prove all of the ways that they did way more than they needed to. As they talk about how exhausted they were, or how much it interfered with their schedule, they are over exaggerating to look like the victim or the martyr that is deserving of favor. Understatements As a perfect opposite to overstatement comes the understatement. Just like how overstatements can be used comically, so too can understatements. However, sometimes, people will use the understatement to deceive others as well. Typically, this is involving the amount that someone had to do with something, such as someone not wanting to take credit for throwing a birthday party at the office, or they want to make something seem like less of a big deal than it actually was. For example, imagine that you accidentally backed into a light pole when you were driving—there is a massive dent in the middle of your back bumper, and your partner is furious. You may understate the damage, saying that it is fine and that your insurance will just cover the cost of the items so you may as well just not bother fixing it. Detecting Deception Now, with all those forms of deception above, you may be wondering how you can ever be certain of whether or when someone else is lying to you. Luckily, there are some simple steps that you can follow in order to figure it out. In general, you are going to want to practice analysis—discovering what is going on in the other person’s mind through learning to recognize all sorts of nonverbal cues. In learning those nonverbal cues, you will find that understanding and learning what other people are thinking is actually far easier than it may otherwise seem. Keep in mind that this process does involve a steep learning curve, and if you want to become a master at identifying attempts at deception, you will want to take the time to learn more about analyzing behavior. In doing so, you will have a massive amount of information to compare to in order to figure out the truth. Before you begin to identify whether someone is lying, you must figure out what their base, honest behavior is. This is because people’s body language will vary from person to person based on mood, temperament, and environment, so you need to have a solid baseline to compare it to. For example, people who are on the timid side may show that they are nervous, but most of the time it is literally just nerves rather than any true reason to be nervous, such as being deceptive. With the baseline figured out, it is time to look for behavior that deviates from that baseline as you talk. If you can pick up deviations and they fit the bill for common behavioral clusters of people that are deceptive, you may be on to something and you should absolutely spend the time looking into things. If you do not recognize any lying behaviors, you may be better off just rejecting the attempts to identify what is going on after all. In general, there are several important cues to remember as nonverbal cues to deception, such as: e Answering questions that were unasked e Answering questions with questions e Not correcting oneself during conversation out of fear of instilling doubt e Faking a lack of memory e A report of what did not happen rather than a focus on what did e Figuring out some way to justify what has happened, even when not necessary e Have some sort of exact alibi for exactly what they could not explain otherwise. e Use less words than others e Describe actions weakly and passively e Focused on the weaknesses in others Chapter 8: NLP Mind Control Have you ever interacted with someone before and found that, inexplicably, you were beginning to have strange and powerful temptations about what to do next? Perhaps you felt like you needed to do something that you would ordinarily never bother with, or you find that your emotions seem to be strangely all over the place, despite the fact that you should have been able to manage them well enough. There may be an explanation for this: Neuro Linguistic processing. This is a particularly powerful set of actions. Words, and behaviors in order to trigger other people into obedience. Effectively, you will be able to access and interact with the other person’s mind, quietly and subtly controlling their mind in ways that were likely entirely unexpected. NLP practitioners vary from people genuinely interested in helping someone else in the world out to people with no other intention but to manipulate and harm others. In particular, these techniques are incredibly difficult to identify, and in not being able to figure them out, you may find that more and more of your behavior changes over time. For that reason, it is incredibly critical that you develop the ability to understand exactly what NLP is and how it works. Not only will you be able to wield these tools yourself if you so choose, you will also be able to identify ways that the usage of these behaviors can be beneficial to everyone What is Neuro Linguistic Processing? Ultimately, NLP is the ability to learn how to communicate effectively with the unconscious mind of either yourself or of others. When you can access the unconscious mind of someone else, you are effectively learning to bypass all of the checks and balances in place to ensure that they are able to retain free will. In particular, you are learning to become a translator between the conscious and unconscious minds. The conscious and unconscious mind both really struggle to interact meaningfully with each other—one wants one thing, but the other cannot quite understand the request. In the end, wires seem to get crossed, and no one is happy with what has happened, how it happened, or what ends up being the end result. However, with NLP, you can learn to speak that language of the unconscious mind. NLP looks to identify the ways that you can do just that in order to make sure that the unconscious mind is actively communicated with in ways that are meaningful and important. This means that you will be able to ensure that the conscious and unconscious mind are working in tandem with each other. This is important because, as is commonly said in NLP, the conscious mind works out the actions and what is wanted while the unconscious mind is tasked with ensuring that the goals and actions actually happen. Stop and think about what the unconscious mind does for a moment—it is responsible for taking care of any and all automatic actions throughout the day. You do not think about driving—your unconscious mind does it for you. You do not think about how to brush your teeth—your unconscious does that too. Basically, your unconscious mind goes through all of the motions, making sure that you are doing exactly what you need to get through your day with the least amount of effort possible. It wants to reserve valuable conscious mind real estate for issues that are actually important, such as making an important decision on which job to apply for or how to go about achieving that difficult goal that you have planned out. Because there is only so much that can be fit into the conscious mind, the unconscious takes over for you. It allows you to run on autopilot for all of those tedious actions that you must get through during the course of your day. Without the unconscious mind, you would find that you need to decide and consciously focus on brushing your teeth, buckling up, and more. NLP to Control Minds If the unconscious mind is what takes care of all of your automatic, habitual behaviors, then, you may wonder why that is what NLP seeks to target. This is a great question—and there is a very simple answer. The unconscious mind is responsible for emotions. Emotions are unconscious reactions to the world around you. You do not choose to feel happiness or anger; it just happens. However, emotions are incredibly motivating. Your thoughts that underlie everything influence those emotions. Your emotions then influence your behaviors. If you want to control behaviors, you want to be able to alter emotions, and it just so happens to be that the easiest way to alter emotions is through figuring out how to directly tap into the thoughts of someone else. Thoughts When you tap into the unconscious mind, then, you are able to mess around with that sequence. You can figure out how to create new thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, all because you are bypassing the conscious mind and interacting with the unconscious. Since the unconscious will almost never actually be acknowledged by the conscious in the moment, this is the best way to directly and simply interact with the other person to avoid raising red flags. When you use NLP, you are using a process that has been used for years primarily in a therapeutic sense. Despite the popularity of it in recent years when used in tandem with dark psychology and attempts to control people, it was initially designed to be something that could be used regularly to ensure that people were taken care of and healthy. It was meant to give power back to the people, looking at what makes psychologists so qualified to help other people when regular people are not. Effectively, NLP techniques are ways to grant the powers of a psychologist to normal people with little training. These techniques can then be used in ways that will benefit everyone involved—you will be able to actively help other people with ease. You will be able to alleviate doubt, create anchors to instill confidence, and more, all because you have these skills. Of course, there is still the possibility of using this mind control for more nefarious reasons. Just as simply as you could use these techniques in order to help other people, you can use them specifically to hurt others as well. Instead of alleviating anxiety or traumatic memories, you can make associations with fear and avoidance in order to push someone further under your thumb. Effectively, when you learn how to use NLP, you hold the mind of someone else, their entire being, in the palm of your hand, and you will be able to manipulate it at will. NLP and Mirroring Ultimately, before you can do anything with NLP, you must become a well liked individual. You must be able to develop what is known as rapport with the person that you are attempting to influence, as without that rapport, you have no entrance into the other person’s unconscious. Your rapport with someone is effectively an accurate measure of just how likely you are to be persuasive with that individual. If you want to be able to impact the other person’s mind, you need to be able to access it, and the best way to access it is to lower the other person’s guard. Before understanding how to create that rapport, however, consider that the unconscious mind is always watching. Even if your conscious mind cannot possibly process everything that you are being exposed to, your unconscious mind is still able to pick up on things. It recognizes even subliminal signals, such as those included in advertisement that completely subvert conscious understanding—and that subversion is what makes this process so powerful. When you can subvert someone else’s mind, you can take control of it. Mirroring is just one way of creating that rapport and gaining access. When you mirror someone, you are telling them something specific—that they matter to you and that you feel some sort of connection to them. Mirroring is what people naturally do as they grow to know those around them better. Look at two best friends for a few minutes and you will see it—they will both walk the same, talk the same, take drinks nearly in tandem with each other, and more. They do this all for a simple reason: Their unconscious minds have developed that rapport with each other. They are directly communicating with the unconscious mind of the other person, saying that they do like and appreciate that other person, and that the other person has their utmost trust. While developing a natural relationship will always be the best way to create rapport, you do not always have time for that. In those instances, you can create rapport with three simple steps: Create a connection, match the other person, and then identify their punctuator. Creating that initial connection is not particularly difficult—you will want to make good, convincing eye contact, spend the time to listen to the other person, and will the connection into existence. You effectively want to give the other person your utmost, undivided attention in hopes of them realizing that you do enjoy what they are talking about. During this stage, try giving the occasional triple nod. This is when you nod three times in a row, usually pensively, to communicate three things to the other person’s unconscious mind. You will tell them that you are attentive, understanding, and agreeing with the other person. With that initial connection created, you will then make it a point to copy the other person. In particular, you may find that the best way to do this is through copying their vocal cues. While body language is always an easy target to mimic, you also risk raising red flags simply because you are mimicking them, and people generally do not appreciate when someone else is copying them. Instead, concentrate on their verbal cues. When you do this, you will usually start by matching the speaking speed and intensity of the other person. If they want to speak to you animatedly, return that right back to them. If they are speaking to you calmly and quietly, you should do the same. In doing so, you are letting them know that you are on the same page as them, even if the behaviors do not necessarily line up quite right. Nevertheless, it is important. With the verbal cues mimicked, try figuring out what the other person’s punctuator is. The punctuator is something that all people do in emphasis when they are talking. Some people may have a saying that they use immediately after making the point that they want to emphasize while other people may intentionally raise their eyebrows or make a movement of the hand. What is true either way is that the punctuator is something that the other person will have, and if you can identify it, you can use it. Once it is identified, you should make it a point to actively use it. The next time that you think the other person is likely to use the punctuator, mimic it. In mimicking it, you will tell the other person’s unconscious mind that you are someone that can be related to, and thus, you open up their mind. Of course, you will want to test that connection before moving forward— you want to ensure that the connection made is valid before you go attempting to use NLP in other ways. All you need to do is move a certain way to determine if the other person will move like you do. If they do, you were successful. If not, then you have likely run into some sort of snag and they are not going to be as likely to follow along. NLP to Create Anchors After creating that rapport, one of the simplest NLP techniques that you can use when interacting with someone else is to create anchors. Anchors are effectively a form of conditioning that can be wielded in order to control the behaviors of someone else. Think about how Pavlov’s dogs were taught to respond to the bell with salivating even if food is not around—that is exactly what you are doing when you anchor someone, except you are most likely using a technique that is far less humiliating. When you want to start out, you must have a rapport built with the other party. With that rapport built, you will want to ensure that you can actively interact with the other person regularly. Since you will effectively be conditioning the other person, you need to be able to do it with the freedom to trigger and expose the other person. Anchoring effectively requires you to follow a few simple steps: You will need to figure out what the anchoring feeling that you want to use is. Then you must identify a way for you to trigger that feeling. From there, you must choose your anchor. With the anchor determined, you will need to trigger the feeling with the chosen trigger, and then simultaneously use the anchor at the same time. Over time of having the feeling and anchor coincide together on a regular basis, the other person will, eventually, become anchored—that is to say, the anchor will trigger the feeling that you wanted to pair with it. ED E> ED ED ED This process is actually far simpler than it sounds. For example, imagine that you want to anchor your friend that has anxiety. He is always stressing out about finals when he has them coming up, and as a college student, those finals come up regularly. This means that he has no choice but to face that fear regularly. You decide that you would rather figure out how to alleviate that anxiety with something relatively simple. You decide that you want to teach him to feel relaxed when he is exposed to the scratching sound of a pencil. After all, during a final, he is likely to hear the constant scratching of pencils on paper. Now, you have chosen a feeling and an anchor. What you missed, however, was the trigger for that feeling. Perhaps you remember that your friend is always super relaxed when he is listening to music. Something about it soothes his soul, he always says. You then play the music as you are sitting next to him and begin scratching away at some paper. You may actually be writing, doodling, or literally just scribbling in circles, but the end result is him beginning to relax as he listens to the music. You repeat this process over time, making sure that it happens regularly as you want to ensure that you really install that conditioning well. After a few weeks, you find that just scribbling on your paper does, in fact, help him calm down, which then enables you to trigger that calmness at will. He never realizes what you did, but right around the next final, he tells you that he is feeling strangely confident as he goes in—that he feels like he is well prepared because as he had studied and took notes, he found himself incredibly calm instead of freaking out like he normally is. NLP and Pace and Lead Similar to being able to anchor someone, another technique you can use after being able to mirror and set up that valuable rapport with someone else is the ability to pace and lead. When you can pace and lead, you are effectively able to control the emotional state of someone else with two simple steps: You first match what they are doing, and then you change the tempo or intensity of it. Remember, mirroring is usually a mutual occurrence—when you are mirroring someone else, they are far more likely to mirror you as well, and you need to remember to use that concept to your own advantage. When you are mirroring someone else, then, and you can see them mirroring you, you can begin to tap into their body language with your own. This means that you can gently and quietly guide them into doing something else without them ever actively thinking about it. For example, imagine that you are talking to that same nervous friend. This time, he is terrified because he wants to ask someone else on a date, but he is too afraid to do it. He is nervously tapping his fingers against the table and shifting back and forth, clear signs of his current anxiety. Instead of leaving him to it without attempting to help, however, you stop and begin to tap your finger on your hand subtly as you listen. You do not make it a point to make it obvious, but you allow it to happen at the same pace as your friend’s. After a bit, you slowly begin to slow down the speed that you are tapping, and you shift your own body language to being relaxed and open. You may slow down your own breathing in an attempt to impact his own breathing rate. After a while, you notice that his tapping is slowing down with yours. This means that your technique is working, and eventually, when you stop tapping your own fingers, you will see that he does, too. Chapter 9: Hypnosis Finally, we have reached hypnosis—of the techniques for mind control that you are learning, this will be the last. As you work toward the ability to hypnotize people, keep in mind everything else that you have learned thus far. The minds of other people are absolutely sacred and should be treated as such. If you are going to be influencing other people, you should always make sure to do it ethically. Remember, just because hypnotizing someone for your own selfish gain is dangerous and not recommended does not mean that hypnosis itself is bad. In fact, hypnosis has gained massive traction lately. You see it used during labor, with women self hypnotizing themselves in order to avoid the pain of labor, focusing through the contractions as a way to manage their own comfort. You see people using hypnosis for cessation of cigarettes or other unhealthy habits. You even see people using it to help them become more self confident. Ultimately, hypnosis has no shortage of usage or of people willing to try it. If you remember to keep your control of other people ethical and consensual, there is no harm in using these methods. However, you must always emphasize consent above all. Nevertheless, it is time to delve into the mysterious world of hypnosis. Within this chapter, you will learn about how hypnosis works, understanding that it is not the utmost control over other people that is typically depicted in cartoons or movies—instead, it is a state of extreme relaxation and suggestibility. We will go over a few positive uses of hypnosis, such as in labor and delivery, and finally, we will look over the steps on how to hypnotize someone else that is willing to be your subject. If all goes well, you will find that influencing other people is far easier than you may have thought. How Hypnosis Works Primarily, hypnosis works because it is cooperative—usually, one person is willingly being relaxed into a hypnotic state, and the hypnotist then encourages the thoughts and behaviors that are desired. In a therapeutic situation, this may look like encouraging the individual to no longer care about an ex that left or being able to resist those cravings of sugar and to exercise more. Effectively, it allows for the implantation of thoughts in a consensual way. This means that the hypnotist is just the coach—they are there to guide the way through the subconscious to create the results that the individual that is being hypnotized wanted in the first place. The hypnotist effectively is able to manage to walk the individual through the steps of hypnosis, and in doing so, guides the individual to that state of extreme calmness. Within the hypnotic state, it is often reported that the one being hypnotized is convinced that they are asleep. They are so deeply relaxed that they feel like they are entirely unaware of the world around them. However, that could not be further from the truth—when you are in a hypnotic state, you are actually incredibly aware and focused—but only on what the hypnotist is saying. If the hypnotist is guiding you through breathing practices to keep you calm, all you will focus on is what the hypnotist is saying. If the hypnotist happens to be using any sort of prop or focal object, you will focus on that. In being so incredibly focused on one particular moment or instance, you will find that you are able to be readily and easily influenced. This primarily works because of the divide between the conscious and unconscious minds. While the two minds work together, the conscious mind acts like a sort of filter between what the unconscious mind is being exposed to and the mind itself. This means that the conscious is basically the guard dog of the mind, and if it interferes, you are not going to be able to get through to the more susceptible, impressionable unconscious, which is where suggestions are meant to go. When you encourage the conscious mind to focus entirely on one object or action, whether breathing or the swinging of a pendulum, or anything else, you distract the conscious. Think of what happens if you throw a dog a piece of steak: They run after the steak and happily munch on that while you are free to move forward. Effectively, with hypnosis, you throw your conscious mind a steak by having it so incredibly focused on what is going on. As this happens, the hypnotist then makes several suggestions. They will talk to the one being hypnotized, making sure that the unconscious mind is able to absorb and internalize all of those thoughts nicely in order to ensure that they do, in fact, become utilized and acted upon. Because the unconscious mind is going to be the one driving actions without the conscious paying attention, those behaviors become quite easy. They simply happen because the unconscious mind does it. Remember how in NLP, you are actively recognizing that the unconscious mind is the one that controls everything? That is effectively what you are seeing here. Hypnosis, like NLP, will make sure that the unconscious mind is acting accordingly to ensure that the one being hypnotized is able to do what was desired. Why Use Hypnosis? Now, with that in mind, you may be wondering why people are so willing and ready to use hypnosis on themselves to the point that they would even pay other people to help them with the process in the first place. The answer is that hypnosis is incredibly powerful because the unconscious is incredibly powerful. It should be used precisely because it does allow people to tap into their unconscious minds to unlock all of the potential that they needed to utilize. When you use hypnosis, you effectively are making sure that you can draw all of the benefits that your mind has to offer. It offers you benefits such as helping cope with any phobias or anxiety triggers that you may have. If your anxiety and phobia is rooted in your unconscious, what better way to treat it than to directly impact it? It can help with pain management without requiring medication, making it incredibly valuable for people that will need pain medication but may find that they are at an increased risk for addiction or abusing that medication if they have it. It can be used to fight stress as well, working as a sort of grounding method for the individual using it if they want to reach a state of relaxation. It can also be used in more insidious ways—some people use hypnosis to control other people. It is commonly used in brainwashing in cults, for example, relying on the constant repetition of words or other methods that are designed to tap into the unconscious mind in some way, shape, or form. This means that hypnosis can be dangerous for those who are particularly susceptible to its effects. Not everyone is, but the vast majority of people are quite susceptible, and this means that these people could be subtly and unknowingly controlled by strangers without ever realizing that it was happening in the first place. Using Hypnosis Ultimately, hypnosis happens in several different ways—some people utilize an utter bombardment of the senses in order to trigger that unconscious state, while others will lull people into it with gentle storytelling or guided meditations. Nevertheless, regardless of the method, the end result is the same: The other person ends up being controlled without being aware of it. We will stop and look at two simple methods of hypnosis that can be used to trigger trances, which can then be utilized to ensure that the one being hypnotized is entirely obedient. Bombardment Think of a time when you had a teacher or someone else that was extraordinarily boring when they spoke. It didn’t matter what was being discussed—their voice was simply so boring; you could not help but space out when they talked. Though unintentional, that is exactly what this sort of hypnosis accomplishes. When you use bombardment, you are effectively creating a constant and steady stimulation that drones on to lull the other person into a trance. It could involve someone speaking rapidly in a flat voice or using someone’s naturally unvaried voice in order to eventually bore the person into a trance. The brain struggles with processing the information when it is all constant and unending, which is exactly why it becomes so difficult to understand. If you want to use this, then, you will want to start up a single topic and stick to it for the next several minutes, making your voice as flat as possible. You want to talk as much as possible during that time, not relenting at all, even when you see that the other person is beginning to lose focus. As the focus is lost, you can begin to talk directly to the unconscious mind, making suggestions and encouraging certain behaviors. Nonverbal Hypnosis Another method is quite similar but is done in complete silence. However, this one will require you to have rapport built with the individual that you are attempting to hypnotize, as you are going to need to tap into their tendency to mirror you if you want to be effective. When you use this method, you are going to make sure that they are following along with your own body language, and you will start to do something repetitive and rhythmic that is still subtle, expecting the other person to follow suit. When you use this, you are effectively having the same relaxing effect that you have on an infant that calms down when swayed. Just as the newborn calms down to the motion, so too do adults, even though they may not even realize that they are still susceptible to actions like that. Start by ensuring that you do have rapport with the other person. With that established, you want to actively mirror the other person for a while until you know that they are mirroring you back. From there, you will begin to use several motions back and forth in an attempt to sway the other person into a relaxed state. However, the key here is making sure that whatever you do, you are making it subtle and easily followed without it seeming to stand out at all when done around other people. Perhaps you start by tilting your head back and forth ever so slightly. It does not have to be particularly obvious—just gently and subtly move your head in a rhythmic manner. Chances are, so long as you are subtle enough, the other person will never notice that you are doing it—but they will pick up on it themselves. As you do this, begin to use more of your body as well, but make sure it is still just as subtle. Perhaps you slowly raise and lower your shoulders ever so slightly along with the slight roll of your head. Then, perhaps you also make it a point to rock back and forth on your heels as well. You may also alter your breathing as well in an attempt to ensure that the other person is breathing deeply and calmly. With some time and effort, you will find that the other person is following all of your cues, especially if you are a trusted party in the first place. As they begin to relax, you will find that they are far more susceptible to what you are saying, and you are more likely to be able to get them to internalize information in this state than before. Make sure that you tell them everything that you wanted their unconscious mind to know before you stop the hypnotic motions, otherwise you risk them coming out of the trance too early, mitigating everything that you are doing. Chapter 10: The Benefits of Dark Psychology At last, we arrive at the end of the book, and as we arrive here, it seems fitting to stop with a brief address of reasons that you could use dark psychology in ways that are not nearly as insidious as many that were discussed within the book. Remember, while dark psychology may be based upon looking at how the dark personality types prey on people, that is not all that it is good for—it is incredibly important to understand these abilities and skills. In understanding comes the ability to protect and prevent, after all. Nevertheless, as you have been exposed to several malicious usages from several of these techniques, let’s go over the ethics of dark psychology, as well as the benefits that may arise from it. Dark psychology does not have to be the harmful concept that it has become because of the people that wielded it—you can reclaim it. Is Dark Psychology Evil? For the million dollar question: Is dark psychology evil? The short answer is, no. It is actually neutral. It does not have the capability of being good or evil in the same sense that gravity cannot be good or evil—it simply is. As a force without free will, without any way to control itself, it cannot possibly be labeled with a human construct such as good or evil. However, that does not mean that it is necessarily safe, nor does it mean that it cannot be used in hurtful manners. While dark psychology itself is not evil, it can be used by evil people. Just as it is not about the gun being evil, but rather the one wielding the gun that determines how evil the situation is, dark psychology is entirely at the mercy of those wielding it. If the individual who uses these techniques uses it for evil purposes, taking advantage of these techniques to steal and abuse, that is his own failure, and no one else’s. That failure is something that he will have to address for himself and no one else, and that is significant. Of course, that means that the inverse is true as well—it cannot truly be a good force either. While dark psychology may not truly be good, it can be used in ways that are beneficial to people, and throughout the book, you were exposed to several. Is it really bad to influence someone to buy a car that will truly better serve their own family? Is it bad to influence someone to no longer have crippling anxiety at the idea of taking a final exam? What about in hypnotizing someone to no longer have insomnia? You would be hard pressed to find anyone who would claim that any of those were bad decisions or wrong, even though they all used techniques common to dark psychology. Remember, as dark psychology has been studied, people have gained access into the minds of predators that are capable of far more than the average person is. The average person is not going to be intentionally manipulating and harassing people on the regular—he is going to be minding his own business. He does not have any interest in preying on other people. So, would that average person have a use for dark psychology? Quite possibly! It can be used in ways that were discussed throughout this book, and those can be beneficial to literally anyone that interacts with other people. Several other techniques can be used on yourself as well. You can anchor yourself to create your own coping mechanisms, for example, or you can choose to self hypnotize in order to help yourself build self confidence. These are not evil. Ultimately, whether the art is good or evil, one thing remains true—it is all about how it is used that determines how welcome the use of it is. Reasons to Use Dark Psychology There are several reasons that one may intentionally learn dark psychology. They may want to use these methods to help themselves—perhaps they were a victim of a dark personality type in the past and they want to understand why. That insight is invaluable, and gaining the reasons why and how someone was able to entirely and utterly dismantle someone’s personality can be therapeutic in some way. In understanding how you have become vulnerable, you can remove those vulnerabilities to figure out how best to fight them off. Some people may learn about dark psychology out of sheer curiosity—we are fascinated by what scares us. After all, horror is a massive genre in movies for a reason! You may find that learning how the insides of an evil individual’s mind works is just as fascinating as it is terrifying, and for that reason alone, you want to keep reading on how they do what they do. Other people may read simply because they want to be able to fight back. When you can recognize dark psychology, you can prevent it from being effective. So much of dark psychology is all about being able to identify vulnerabilities and exploit them, and if you know those vulnerabilities and about the common exploits, you can simply side step them. You can avoid falling for them and instead work on strengthening your own skills to protect yourself. Effectively, dark psychology is incredibly flexible, as are the techniques. The very same techniques that can utterly destroy someone else can also be used in ways that actually better everyone involved. They can build self confidence and self esteem. They can help cope with anxiety and other mental health issues. They can make you more likely to be successful in interacting with other people simply because you will have a better understanding. Above all, you will be able to protect yourself with ease. You will be able to have peace of mind, thanks to learning about dark psychology. At the very least, you will be able to rest easy knowing that the dark personality types will be far less likely to pull a fast one over you simply because you know what to expect. The Insight of Dark Psychology Now, as this book finally comes to an end, try to think about the ways that dark psychology and the secrets that it holds may have provided you with insight. What have you learned about the world that you did not know before? What do you know about the mind and how it works? What secrets have you learned that are invaluable? Dark psychology is quite unique in the sense that it opens the window for us to see through the eyes of the narcissist, the Machiavellian, or the psychopath. In understanding how these techniques work, you can see exactly what spurs these people to act in the ways that they do. You can figure out why people want to behave these ways and what they stand to gain by doing so. While you may never want to manipulate others yourself, you may find that the insight of understanding why is critical, especially if you are in the position of healing from a relationship with one such person. When you are able to understand the other person’s mind, you may be able to recognize it for what it truly is—disordered. Beyond just that, though, the insight provided in understanding dark psychology allows us to see what made us so vulnerable to its grasp in the first place. You will be able to see exactly why these problems arise. You will know what it is that each of these techniques plays off of, and in knowing what they use, you can figure out how to shield from them. Consider that NLP directly influences the unconscious mind. When you know that the unconscious mind is one of the most commonly attacked parts of the mind when trying to influence someone else, you can remind yourself to always do self checks, understanding why you do what you are doing at any time. You can ask yourself if the behaviors that you are doing at that moment are your own, or if they are common for people that are usually manipulated. You can figure out if the thought in your mind that is driving you is your own, or if it seems out of place, or contradictory to a though that you know that you have had for ages. Effectively, when you are able to recognize the thought processes of yourself in relation to dark psychology, you can figure out whether you have been manipulated in the past. Knowing that is critical to recognizing if you are actually a victim or if you are proactive enough to avoid victimization altogether. What is true, despite the insight that you have gained, however, is that, you have earned knowledge. You have knowledge of what is possible in the world. You have knowledge about the mind and some of its secrets. You have knowledge about the predators that you may never have been aware of in reality. That is invaluable. Knowledge is power, and if you can wield that power bravely and proudly, you will be able to protect yourself. Conclusion Congratulations! That brings us to the end of Dark Psychology Secrets. Hopefully, as you read, you found the content to be compelling, interesting, informative, and easy to follow. With care, this book was designed to guide you through the world of dark psychology. Dark psychology is the look into the minds of the most heinous, monstrous humans that exist. When you are looking into the depths of dark psychology, you are looking into the minds of those who are out to hurt others. Serial killers, master manipulators, and abusers alike may share these traits, and those traits make them particularly dangerous. What is worse, however, is that these people understand psychology. They understand exactly how they need to interact with other people in order to be seen as charismatic and trustworthy enough to win a spot in the hearts of their victims and targets. The dark psychology user is able to do this simply by knowing how to manipulate their target in just the right way. However, they can only hurt and manipulate you if you give them that power. Remember, having the power to recognize and reject the abuse from the dark psychology user will be your best shield and sword from them. Not only will it help you guard against them and their attempts, you will also be able to access their minds right back. As you read through this book, perhaps the most important takeaway from it all is to remember that dark psychology itself is neutral—it is neither good nor bad. While the original wielders may have been malevolent, that does not make their weapons inherently bad as well. Remember that being able to understand dark psychology grants you a special access to the mind of someone else and you should always be mindful of how you use that access. It should not be abused in any manner. Finally, as you finish up, remember to always keep your own use of dark psychology ethical. Always ask yourself if you really need to tap into the mind of someone else. Ask yourself if the other person is the primary beneficiary if you do happen to tap into their mind. Ask yourself if they will be happy to have the end results of you tapping into their mind. If you can answer that they will be benefitted significantly and they will appreciate it, then it may be an acceptable time to use your arts. Nevertheless, as this book draws to a close, you may be wondering what comes next. Ultimately, that depends upon you. You have learned some of the basics of dark psychology. Do you want to learn more about the natural users? Do you want to learn how to fight it? Do you want to learn how to become a better user? What is your end goal? No matter what that goal is, you may find that there are several options for you to pursue from here. You could make it a point to learn how to become emotionally intelligent. This goes hand in hand with being able to persuade others with ease. You may decide to look into the process of cognitive behavioral therapy—doing so may provide you with more resources to protect yourself and heal from any manipulation that you may have identified in your life. You may decide that what is right for you is to look into the narcissist himself, learning how he abuses in order to better understand him. You may even choose to delve into psychology in general —there are several different topics that you may find to be interesting and useful in your journey from here on out. No matter what you choose, however, keep in mind that it is up to you.l No matter what anyone else tries to convince you, you deserve free will. You deserve to be able to protect that free will. You deserve to have that free will honored. As you go through the next chapter in your joumey, good luck. Hopefully, you have found what you needed within this book, and you will find what you need in the future as well. Thank you for allowing me to join you on your journey through dark psychology, and good luck as you continue. Finally, if you have found that this book has been compelling, useful, or even just generally informative, please feel free to leave a review on Amazon. Your feedback, whether good or bad, is always welcome to ensure that these books are always improving. Emotional Intelligence & Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Secrets and Techniques to Improve Mental, Cognitive, Emotional, and Relational Abilities. Overcome Depression, Anxiety, Phobia and Negative Thought Introduction Congratulations on purchasing Emotional Intelligence & Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and thank you for doing so. If you have ever felt like no matter how hard you have tried in life there always seems to be something going wrong, you are not alone. Whether you find that you are a negative person, that you suffer from anxiety, depression, or a wide range of other problematic moods, or you simply feel like your thinking is not as efficient as it could be, you may be feeling like what you need above all is to find some way to protect yourself or how to correct how you approach the situation. Many people believe that if they do suffer from anxiety or depression, the only treatment option for them is medication. While medication itself is not something to look down upon, there are also several situations during which you could choose to treat the issue behaviorally instead. Instead of assuming you have no option but to use medication, you may consider attempting to work on yourself instead. Of course, you should make this decision in tandem with your primary care provider, especially if you would have to discontinue the use of a medication in order to begin focusing solely on the behavioral aspect. You should always continue the use of your medication as directed and only wean off as directed and with a doctor’s approval. Ultimately, there are several ways that you can begin to treat yourself for issues like anxiety, depression, anger issues, and insomnia through attempts to change your behavior instead of attempts to change biology. Some people prefer traditional psychotherapy, in which they sit and talk to a therapist for an extended period of time to get to the bottom of whatever issue they are having. Other people like to use eye movement desensitization and reprocessing in order to help, especially if they find that they are suffering from forms of anxiety related to unprocessed trauma. This book, in particular, will address two specific forms of self help: Emotional intelligence and cognitive behavioral therapy. With the skills and knowledge within each of these processes, you will begin to develop the skills to tackle nearly any issues related to emotions. All you need is time, effort, patience, compassion for yourself, and a guide such as this book to give you all of the critical information you will need. As you read this book, you will be given a guide to both the topics of emotional intelligence and to cognitive behavioral therapy. Emotional intelligence will help you build up the skills and awareness you will need to be effective in a social setting, which can help mitigate anxiety and depression symptoms. Cognitive behavioral therapy can help you begin to restructure your thoughts from the ground up—literally. You will be able to change your unconscious thoughts in order to impact how you think and feel about situations. In particular, you will look at techniques that will guide you through tackling the symptoms of anxiety, depression, insomnia, and uncontrolled anger. Finally, you will be given a list of several social skills that you will find can actually help your chances of achieving your goals. Before you begin this book, remember, if you ever feel like you are a danger to yourself or others, you should always reach out for help. If you feel like you have urges to hurt yourself or to intentionally inflict harm upon others, you should consider this as a legitimate medical emergency. You do not have to feel that way, and recognizing that those feelings are wrong is only the beginning of protecting yourself. There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much useful information as possible; please enjoy! Chapter 1: Emotional Intelligence Can you think of a person that you interact with regularly that does not seem to understand normal social conventions? No matter how often you interact, you may find that he is still just as clueless about basic standards and how to interact with others, and it becomes somewhat of a drain. Imagine your friend, Eric. He is someone who struggles to actually speak his mind with other people. He frequently volunteers for far more than he can actually comfortably accomplish. He tries his best to actively meet his obligations, but to no avail—he simply overcommits and it always comes back to haunt him. Of course, he then gets incredibly frustrated and tends to lash out at other people in response, despite the fact that it was his fault. He always finds a way to blame other people for his own shortcomings, and they are never his own fault. Even if he had dropped a plate out of sheer clumsiness, he is likely to blame it on the floor or on his shoes, or even the way that the sun was glaring in his eyes. This is the picture of someone lacking self awareness: A basic component of emotional intelligence. Emotional intelligence is a skill set that is critical to success, particularly in any setting that requires group interactions. In fact, employers will frequently choose to go for the less qualified, but still more emotionally intelligent individual over the smarter, but less emotionally intelligent individual when hiring, specifically because of all of the benefits that emotional intelligence brings with it. When you are emotionally intelligent, you are generally far more pleasant to be around, and that is something that even the best built resume cannot guarantee. You may have gotten a degree at Harvard, top of your class, but if you are not emotionally intelligent, you are going to be excruciatingly difficult to work with in any capacity. Think about Eric for a moment—he was incredibly draining to interact with simply because of the fact that he could not hold himself accountable. What is Emotional Intelligence? You may be wondering, then: What is emotional intelligence? You can understand that it is an important skillset, but why? The answer is relatively simple. Emotional intelligence is commonly defined as the ability to be aware of and control one’s own emotions while also maintaining the ability to manage relationships with others in a way that is fair and empathetic. Now, that is a bit of a mouthful. However, it can be broken down into three distinct points: e It involves the ability to understand one’s own emotions e It involves being able to avoid falling for gut reactions and emotional impulses with self regulation. e It involves being able to manage relationships with others in ways that are fair, empathetic, and beneficial Effectively, it is your ability to make sure that you are not reacting to the world like an angry preschooler. Think about how a preschooler is prone to react to almost any situation: If you take away something that a preschooler was playing with, the child may yell and scream in frustration, or try to hurt you in response. This is primarily because the preschooler is not able to self regulate. He is impulsive because the parts of his brain that are needed to manage them are not yet developed. When you are highly emotionally intelligent, you are able to remain in control instead. You are more likely to react in ways that are intelligent and Strategic rather than giving in to whatever your most recent emotional impulse was. If someone does something that angers you, you are not going to decide to run them over with your car or get back at them, simply because you know that, while anger has a specific purpose and place, it is not what you should use when managing your relationships with others. Anger is motivating, but rarely is the destruction that anger can encourage worthwhile. People naturally flock to those with emotional intelligence for one specific reason—they are far easier to deal with than those who are not. If you can make sure that you do not give in to your impulses, you are making intelligent, informed decisions on how to react. Instead of screaming that your order was delayed and will be late, you shrug it off, apologize to the intended recipient and file away in the back of your mind that you will be making it a point to order earlier next time to avoid the same problem from happening again in the future. You learn from the past and move on without letting it get you down because that is the most well adjusted manner to go about your life and motivators. In general, emotional intelligence can change from person to person, and people usually have differing amounts of emotional intelligence that has developed naturally. Some people are simply more inclined to be empathetic and self disciplined, and because of this, the picture of emotional intelligence is always different. It can present itself differently in one person over another, but what is important to remember is that it is a skill. Anyone can learn to be emotionally intelligent if they know and learn how to approach the situation, and in learning to be emotionally intelligent, you will find that you are far happier within your relationships. You will find that other people are kinder to you when you are able to regulate your own emotions and expectations, and you will find that you are more likely to be favored over someone who does not have emotional intelligence. That benefit alone makes learning the process and skillsets that much more critical. The History of Emotional Intelligence Despite the fact that the concept of emotional intelligence itself is a relatively new concept, it has always existed in some capacity. You can see it across species, with those that are highly empathetic being among the most effective leaders. In fact, oftentimes, in primates, the leaders show just as much, if not more, empathy than the females of their species. When you think about what it means to lead, this makes sense: When you are empathetic, you are able to understand the feelings of others: You can tell how the emotions of other people are impacting them and those around them. You can tell what people need because you understand their feelings. When you can understand their feelings, you are able to help them better: You feel motivated to help people more than before simply because you know how they feel and you can relate. However, in relatively recent years, this understanding of what makes a good leader a good leader has become more and more focused upon in research. The usage of the term, “emotional intelligence,” occurred for the first time in locatable history in 1964, coined by a psychology professor named Michael Beldoch. He may have named the topic, but it did not become mainstream until 1995. In 1995, with the book Emotional Intelligence, Daniel Goleman managed to push the concept of emotional intelligence into the limelight with his claims that it was crucial if people wanted to be successful in life. According to Goleman, upwards of 66% of what creates a successful individual can be directly related and attributed to emotional intelligence. When you think about it practically, this makes sense: Emotional intelligence determines how people are able to interact with others. It is how people are able to get along and solve conflicts, as well as how to build relationships. In this life, it is next to impossible to live without any interaction from other people, and this is exactly why emotional intelligence got so much support. However, despite the fact that Goleman was responsible for pushing it into popularity. There was research happening long before him. In particular, the psychologists Peter Salovey and John Mayer began to study emotional intelligence well before Goleman. They used the term with the definition that you learned above with slightly more specific language: IN particular, they defined emotional intelligence as the ability to recognize and understand the emotions of both oneself and those of others, while also being able to discriminate to decide upon which feelings should be used and which should be avoided, while actively using that ability to discriminate against emotions in interactions with others. Effectively, they were the ones who came up with a solid definition that made emotional intelligence what it is today. Salovey and Mayer, in particular, studied how to understand the concept of emotional intelligence as a whole, seeking to find out if it is necessary. Eventually, they came up with what is known as the ability model. The ability model states that there are four distinct skills that are necessary to understand emotional intelligence and to behave emotionally intelligently. These skills are: e The ability to perceive emotions, such as through nonverbal body language and expressions e The ability to reason with emotions, using them in order to promote thinking e The ability to understand emotions, learning to interpret emotions, even in difficult situations e The ability to manage emotions, such as being able to respond in the most appropriate manner, even when it is not the way you would like to behave. Not too long after Salovey and Mayer came up with their definitions, the rise of Goleman’s model quickly rose to popularity, referred to commonly as the Mixed Model of emotional intelligence. In particular, Goleman identified five components that are responsible for emotional intelligence. These five components come together to create the ability to behave in ways that are emotionally intelligent, and they are: e The ability to use self awareness e The ability to use self regulation e The ability to keep yourself motivated e The ability to be empathetic e The ability to use social skills Finally, in more recent history, a psychologist by the name of Konstantinos V. Petrides has been dabbling in his own interpretations of emotional intelligence. In fact, he came up with what was known as the Trait Model. Within the trait model, it is assumed that the perceptions of a person’s own abilities determine how people approach a situation. Effectively, if you think that you are patient, you will respond patiently far more often than someone who thinks of themselves as hotheaded. The purpose of this final model is to recognize that people will usually find that they are prone to very specific behaviors, and in learning that those methods are how they usually respond to situations, they will use that thinking to determine future behaviors. This is how people get stuck into the same actions over and over again: If you believe that you are an angry person, you are more inclined to behave angrily because you already see yourself as angry anyway. When you then respond angrily, you prove to yourself that you are, in fact, angry in general. Chapter 2: The Purpose of Emotional Intelligence Imagine that you are ready to go on a date with someone that you have been wanting to ask out for months. You finally built up the courage to approach the other person and ask for a date, but as you approach, you find that you completely stumble over the words. With your cheeks flushing in embarrassment, you need to figure out what to do next. You could yell in frustration, something that you strongly feel the urge to do. You could leave and refuse to speak to the person you wanted to ask out again because you are so embarrassed, but doing so is only going to hurt. You could try any number of different things, and you need to figure out what to do next, and quickly. How do you do it? This is a decision that will be made with your emotional intelligence in mind. If you are not particularly emotionally intelligent, you are likely to reject the idea of actually making any sort of scene that would be problematic to your chances of getting a date. You are also not likely to do something that would be embarrassing. You are more likely to choose to regroup yourself and try again because you are invested in the relationship working out. However, how likely are other people going to be to do the same? Emotional intelligence impacts everything. Because emotions drive nearly everything that we do, lurking in your subconscious mind with our minds telling us what to do and not to do through impulses, emotional intelligence is vital to every decision you make. Are you likely to behave impulsively? You likely do not have very good self control or self regulation skills, which are an important component of emotional intelligence. Are you likely to try to be the people pleaser, even though it means that you do not meet your own needs? You may be inclined to say that would be incredibly emotionally intelligent, as helping other people could be seen as having empathy, but this is actually another sign of lacking it: You are too timid to strive toward having your own needs met and choose the discomfort of not having your own needs met over the discomfort of having to face a potentially difficult situation. Emotional Intelligence in Real Life In real life, emotional intelligence has several practical uses. It actually shows up in literally every interaction that you have with other people. Even when you are by yourself, emotional intelligence is directly related to how you handle any problems that arise or the way that you view yourself. Imagine for a moment that you are in a relationship with someone else. You are quite emotionally intelligent, but your partner is not. You and your partner disagree about something, and while you are willing to disagree and move on, your partner seems wholeheartedly offended about the disagreement and claims that if you cannot change your own mind and figure out how best to assimilate with your partner’s views, then your partner does not think that the relationship is viable long term. This is an example of the difference between how someone with low and high emotional intelligence would handle that situation—the one with low EQ thinks of the situation as entirely worthless. They are driven by their emotions, and if their emotions tell them that they cannot be in a relationship with someone who disagrees with them, then they refuse to do exactly that. They will not be in that relationship simply because they would rather serve themselves than the other party. They need absolute harmony in order to feel like their relationship is secure. Is that realistic? Not really—trelationships are never perfect. There are no two people in the world that will ever have a perfect marriage without any conflict at all. Emotional intelligence includes several very important skills in order to function as well as it is supposed to. In order to be emotionally intelligent, you must be able to be self aware. The partner in the previous example was simply not. The partner was unable to recognize that it was emotions clouding the situation and that the relationship was not deserving of being dropped just because of one small disagreement. When you are self aware, you know when you are behaving in an emotional manner rather than a way that should be conducive to success and happiness. Beyond that, emotional intelligence encompasses empathy—this means that you will be using emotional intelligence every single time that you relate to someone else around you. You will be spending that time with other people and wholeheartedly expecting that the situation would be fine because you can relate and communicate. However, that relationship and communication ability comes directly from your ability to be emotionally intelligent. Consider all of the social skills that you use on a regular basis outside of self regulation and empathy. Your ability to persuade others is a trait common to emotional intelligence. Your ability to recognize the differences between people as inherently good is a sign of emotional intelligence. Essentially, if you are a good person and people genuinely enjoy being around you, you are probably emotionally intelligent. That will come back to help you in your relationships, at work, when dealing with conflicts, and even just when you are at home and got some disappointing news. In being emotionally intelligent, you are more likely to be happier, comfortable, and successful in most aspects of life. The Practicality of Emotional Intelligence This obviously makes emotional intelligence incredibly practical—if it determines the success in nearly every aspect of your life, it must be practical in some ways, right? That is exactly right. Emotional intelligence allows you to do several things. You will be able to express yourself without worrying about what other people think—consider how usually, when met with resistance from other people, it can be difficult to express your disagreement. When you are emotionally intelligent, you do not worry about it because you trust that you have the tact to handle the situation smoothly and effectively. This is a practical use—you do not have to worry about uncomfortable conversations. You are likely to be more resilient when you are emotionally intelligent as well—think of the benefit of that for a moment. This means that you can cope with disappointment and problems without immediately freaking out. So many people these days cannot handle the stress of something changing or plans having to be altered, but if you are emotionally intelligent, beyond that initial worry, you will find that change is not so scary after all. In fact, you welcome change. If that change came because something you have done has failed, you would see it as the perfect opportunity to attempt to learn from whatever went wrong the first time. This means that you will legitimately be learning from your mistakes instead of feeling like they are the biggest disappointment in the world. Perhaps the most practical skill of all, however, is not the ability to communicate, or the ability to cope with change and failure, but rather, to be a good leader. Emotional intelligence creates fantastic leaders that are able to weigh everything into consideration in order to figure out how best to approach a situation at hand. This means that if you are a good leader, you will be able to make good, clear judgments that are in everyone’s best interest, even if it is not necessarily the path that you would have chosen yourself. This is okay—it means that you are actively thinking ahead about your people, and that is what makes you such a good leader. You genuinely care about those that work with you, and you want to ensure that everyone is taken care of. Traits of Emotional Intelligence Now, let’s take a look at exactly what it is that makes someone emotionally intelligent. What are the traits that can be used to identify whether someone is actually emotionally intelligent versus simply good at faking relationships? People who are highly emotionally intelligent find that they are often quite competent when it comes to anything related to emotions. They can understand their own emotions, while also recognizing the emotions of others. They are able to relate to other people and use their own feelings to help them understand, but at the end of the day, they do not give in to their feelings. They are ultimately in control, despite the fact that their feelings may be incredibly compelling. These people are also incredibly motivated and driven—they have an intrinsic drive to them that is rare otherwise. They know that they can accomplish nearly anything, and they will always seek to better themselves. Success is rarely the endpoint for these people, and they will always strive for better, but also recognize that perfection is an impossibility. Effectively, they are chasing after practical betterment without ever aiming for an impossibility the way that some people without emotional intelligence, such as the narcissist, may do. Finally, one of the best skills of all is actually a series of skills. The emotionally intelligent individual is incredibly strong in regards to social skills. They are able to regulate themselves with ease around other people, and able to communicate like it is second nature to them—because it is. While it may have taken time to build that emotional intelligence up, with it present, it becomes like second nature to always ensure that they are able to communicate and interact with ease. These people are so good at interacting with others that they seem to make friends and develop a following no matter where they go. Everyone wants to acknowledge them and get to know them, and their own charisma seems to attract people that want to help with ease. Chapter 3: The Pillars of Emotional Intelligence As touched upon earlier, emotional intelligence comes in the form of four distinct pillars: Self awareness, self management, social awareness, and relationship management. Each of these pillars contain several other skills within them that come together, and when you are able to assemble them all in one person, you end up with someone who is emotionally intelligent. You can learn to develop each of these skillsets over time, manually working with them until you are able to be just as emotionally intelligent as those who were born with that flair naturally. Keep in mind, however, that as you develop this skill, you consider the fact that it does take time and energy. You cannot simply do two or three quick activities and suddenly declare that you are emotionally intelligent. Emotional intelligence is the culmination of the development of these skills, and that culmination only comes if you are able to actively exercise those emotional intelligence muscles. You can then think of your emotional intelligence as your body: If you do not work on it for a while and feed it nothing but junk, it is going to begin to fail you. You will become unhealthy. However, that does not mean that you have to remain unhealthy. Just as you can exercise your body in order to lose weight and build muscle and heart health, you can exercise your ability to be emotionally intelligent. Even skills such as empathy can be developed with relative simplicity if you are willing to put in the work to do SO. Now, we will take the time to go over each of the four pillars of emotional intelligence, what they entail, and the most common skills that are regularly bundled with them. As you read through this chapter, try to think about yourself and where you play out in this all. Are you emotionally intelligent? If not, what can you do to bring yourself to that level? Can you figure out where you are lacking? Try to self analyze as we go through this process, and if it helps, use a notebook in order to write down anything that comes to mind. Self awaren Social Awareness ess Pillars of Emotional Intelligence = Relation ship manage ment Self regulation Self Awareness Self awareness encompasses your ability to know what is going on with yourself at any given moment. Effectively, it allows you to know your own current state with a quick check in. In particular, you will need to be able to identify your own emotional state—knowing exactly how you are feeling at any given moment. Remember, you should know the emotion more specifically than just saying that you feel good or bad—you should be able to tell if good or bad is actually happy, angry, annoyed, disappointed, or anything else. Beyond just emotional self awareness, you must also be able to perform what is known as an accurate self assessment—this is the ability to understand your own strengths and weaknesses at any given moment and is a critical skill to have. When you can accurately self assess, you are declaring that you are well aware of your own shortcomings and aspects of your life in which you may need help. Remember, it is okay to need help sometimes—but you need to know when to ask for it. Finally, self awareness also encompasses the skill of self confidence. You need to be able to trust yourself, knowing that you are capable. In being capable, you must be willing to put your best self forward. Understanding your own abilities and how well you think that you can do them, you are able to make proper judgments on what is doable for you and what you cannot do. It does not lack self confidence if you turn down a job for legitimate means—if you do not understand how to do the job, the self confident thing to do is to reject the job altogether because you know that you are not the right fit for it and you are not ashamed to admit it. Self Management The second skillset involved in emotional intelligence is known as self management. This will encompass all of the skills that determine how well you manage or control yourself, including how well you stay on task or if you are able to ever get anything done in the first place. Those with high self management are quite self controlled—they recognize that their own emotional maturity is critical and are able to control those feelings and express them in appropriate manners in appropriate settings. This is critical—it means that you are actively making it a point to make decisions that will keep you from behaving impulsively in any way. Beyond that, you are also quite goal oriented as well. In knowing that you need to achieve things, you are able to make sure that you are always working toward them. You understand the value of goals and actively take advantage of them whenever possible. This skill is invaluable—it means that you are regularly able to keep yourself on track and organized enough to figure out how to get there. Further, that goal orientation also comes along with the ability to be motivated. You have the initiative to keep yourself moving forward, even when you are not required to do so. You will move forward simply because you want to continue to better yourself in any way possible. You are also quite transparent when you are a self manager—you are honest with everyone around you, even when that involves telling people that you have actually failed. You will always err on the side of honesty rather than trying to avoid annoying other people with lies and half truths meant to disguise your own failures. You would much rather take the fall when you need to in order to make sure that you act with integrity. This, however, also brings with it a sense of optimism. When you know that you are going to be honest with your work and with those around you, you can admit when things are going wrong and act accordingly. Because you are motivated to keep working and moving forward, you find that the optimism comes easy. Social Awareness The third pillar of emotional intelligence is social awareness. This is your ability to understand other people’s emotional states just as you were able to learn your own. Effectively, it is self awareness with some empathy sprinkled in for good measure to allow those feelings of understanding to extend to other people as well. After all, emotional intelligence is a social skill. The primary skill of social awareness is empathy. It is the ability to create connections with other people in a way that allows you to understand the emotions of others. More specifically, at this stage, you are developing a sense of emotional and cognitive empathy—this means that you are able to develop an understanding of what it is as a concept while also being able to relate to the feeling as well. People with high social awareness also tend to develop what is commonly referred to as the service orientation. This is almost like being a people pleaser but without the negative connotation. When you are able to develop this service orientation, you will find that you are always happy and willing to help contribute. You want to ensure that those around you that would be reliant on you in any way for anything at all are cared for. Think of how when you go to a restaurant, the waiter’s job is to ensure that you have everything that you need—he facilitates your ability to enjoy a good meal. He seats you and takes your orders. He brings you drinks and delivers your orders to the cook. He ensures that you get all of your orders and makes sure that everything is exactly as you wanted it to be, and finally, he helps you pay and cleans up the mess afterward. That is a service orientation—he is there to serve. When you are emotionally intelligent, you develop a similar disposition toward helping other people. You find that helping other people comes naturally and that you want to always facilitate other people’s success as well. You will do whatever you can in order to ensure that other people are well taken care of and happy. Finally, when you have a solid sense of social awareness, you are inclined to recognize organizational awareness. This is your ability to accurately judge the people with whom you are talking to and scale your own usage of language appropriately. For example, imagine that you are going to be talking to people about road safety. You are going to have a very different conversation with 5 year olds about road safety than you would have with a group of adults, and for a good reason—when you have that conversation with children, not only is their understanding of safety entirely different simply because they are younger, they are also not going to be driving a car. A talk to children about road safety would primarily encompass a discussion about ensuring that the children stay out of the road and do not cross the road without an adult or parent to facilitate. With adults, however, you may go into talk about what to do in inclement weather—many people do not know how to drive effectively in the snow, for example. You may inform people that what they need to do is get chains or snow tires or to explain that in certain weather, it is totally acceptable to slow down significantly to ensure that you are safe on the road as you drive. The ability to understand how to scale your speech to your target audience is critical. Relationship Management The final pillar of emotional intelligence is relationship management. This is effectively your ability to manage and facilitate the relationships between other people. You will effectively recognize these skills as the ideal leader skills in someone else. When you are effective as a leader, these tend to come naturally as a result. The first subskill of relationship management is becoming an inspirational leader. This can take several forms—just because you are inspirational does not mean that you have to be in the most authoritative role in the hierarchy. You can achieve this skill simply by modeling proper behaviors. You show that you are a good mentor that people can come to when they are in doubt or worried that they do not know what they are doing, and you can help facilitate them. Beyond that, you are also bound to be quite influential. In particular, you will be incredibly skilled when it comes to influence and persuasion without actively manipulating others. You will have such a way with words that you are able to efficiently and clearly motivate those around you just with your words alone. You do not need to make major promises or attempt to convince everyone else of what you want them to do—you can just get them to do it. On top of the ability to motivate with ease, you find that you also become incredibly skilled at mitigating conflicts. You are able to stop them before they can begin, but also to help settle any disputes that do arise. Because you are so skilled at looking at other people and how they interact with each other, you are able to figure out how best to improve relationships as well, and you are quite skilled at putting together teams of people that complement each other quite well. While you are solving conflicts, you may also run into situations in which you need to create change, and you are willing to do exactly that. In fact, you are more than happy to do exactly that, and you do so on a regular basis. If you feel that change is warranted, you will strive to make it happen, even if it is an unpopular opinion or if other people seem to look down on you for having that opinion in the first place. Finally, you are skilled at managing and leading teams. You are able to not only see how best to help others come to the realization that they can and should be working together to really see the best benefits, you also now recognize that there are ways to assemble your teems that will bring out the best in everyone. Not only that, you are willing to work with them as well. No job is beneath you when you are emotionally intelligent, and you are willing to do just about anything if it needs to get done. You are always happy to be a team player. Emotional Intelligence and Empathy While not one of the four key pillars of emotional intelligence, empathy deserves its own section for proper recognition. When you are empathetic, you are effectively quite capable of understanding and relating to other people with ease. You find that you have no struggles with figuring out how best to reach out to other people and find that you are regularly motivated to help. That motivation to help comes from empathy. Within empathy, when you become capable of both emotional empathy and cognitive empathy, you usually develop what is known as compassionate empathy. Compassionate empathy is your own ability to recognize what other people need and feel the need to help meet that need, if at all possible. Effectively, if you know that someone else is struggling around you, you are able to relate to them. It doesn’t matter what the struggle is; you feel like you can relate, and because you can relate, you want to help them in some way. That help may be giving food or money to the homeless person you see on the side of the road. It may be calling up a friend and offering to babysit for the weekend because you can see just how overworked she is at the moment. It could even be arranging for a fundraiser and meal train for someone going through a major medical event without them knowing about it. When you have compassionate empathy, you do not care what you have to do—you simply want to help other people, and you use that gift of empathy to do just that. This is a defining feature of being highly emotionally intelligent. In the lower pillars, it can be common for people to understand somewhat what someone else is feeling or why their feelings are important, but it takes true emotional intelligence for compassionate empathy to begin to develop. Emotional Empathy Cognitive Empathy Chapter 4: Emotional Intelligence and the Narcissist Now, if high EQ is so incredibly beneficial, what happens when there is little to no emotional intelligence in someone? Ultimately, the individual without much emotional intelligence often suffers from several important symptoms that can cause a serious upheaval in his or her life. Lacking empathy and basic social skills, they cannot relate to other people. Without any emotional regulation, they are quite impulsive. Now, before we continue to paint this picture of the individual lacking emotional intelligence, let’s stop and consider the narcissist for a moment. When most people hear the word “narcissist,” they assume that it is little more than a buzzword meant to generate clicks. However, that could not be further from the truth. Despite the fact that the name is derived from a myth, the actual disorder is a very real occurrence. What is NPD? Narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) is a personality disorder that is primarily characterized by a strange, distorted sense of reality. The individual suffering from NPD believes wholeheartedly that he is the best person present in the world. He acknowledges that out of everyone around, he is the best there is. He is perfection personified—no one can possibly be better than him. Since he is the best person in the world, according to him, he wants to be lavished in attention. He wants other people to acknowledge that he is the best and that no one can say otherwise. Of course, he says this with little expectation to prove it. He is so entitled that he believes that everyone else must just give him what he wants because he is that special. Ultimately, NPD is an incredibly destructive personality disorder that wreaks havoc on those suffering from it. If you suffer from narcissistic personality disorder, there is a good chance that you lack empathy, you are grandiose, you assume that you are deserving of attention, you believe that you are perfect and special, and you are going to manipulate anyone that gets in the way of any of those truths. Anyone who is on the outside looking in, however, knows the truth. Despite the fact that the narcissist’s overinflated ego is fed by his own entitlement, he is not actually deserving of that attention. He is likely not anyone like he attempts to present himself as. Ultimately, NPD is no joke. These people are manipulative, abusive, and will pretend to be someone that they are not simply because they want to get what they want. They will not stop at anything to get whatever else they have decided to get from other people. They are so self absorbed that it does not matter what happens to anyone else. In particular, someone who suffers from NPD will present with several distinctive traits—they will lack empathy. They will be exploitative and manipulative in order to ensure that they always get what they want in the situation. They will make it a point to always focus on perfection. They will believe that they are uniquely special in the world and cannot identify with anyone else. They will have a grandiose view of themselves. They will be obsessed with power, and they will feel entitled to getting that power, no matter whether they earned it or not. Effectively, the narcissist is the antithesis of someone with emotional intelligence. Emotional Intelligence and the Narcissist If the person with high EQ is capable of empathizing heavily with other people, the narcissist is not. The high EQ individual is empathetic and giving by default, whereas the narcissist is demanding and selfish. The narcissist does not care what has to be sacrificed for him, so long as the sacrifice desired actually happens. If high EQ brings with it leadership skills and admiration, both things that the narcissist desperately wants, unfortunately, the narcissist lacks in both departments. The narcissist may strive to have those two end goals, but at the end of the day, his pervasive lack of empathy makes that impossible. He cannot make proper, real relationships with other people simply because he is incapable of relating to other people. Now, you may be thinking, emotional intelligence is the solution to narcissism, right? Unfortunately, that is a bit of a complicated question. When you are narcissistic, you believe that you are perfect and always right. Part of the personality disorder is the inability to recognize when you are at fault for something. Instead of being able to admit fault and move on with the attempts to try to better him or herself, the narcissist instead doubles down and insists that nothing is wrong with him. He believes that he is fine the way he is. However, remember that a major portion of the most basic functions of emotional intelligence were self awareness and self regulation. The narcissist has none. The narcissist does not accurately self assess and does not see anything as a weakness—everything must be a strength at all times. The narcissist does not regulate emotions—if anyone angers him, he will lash out at anyone around without holding back. The narcissist is, effectively, almost untreatable because of these pervasive beliefs. In order for emotional intelligence to be effective, the narcissist would have to admit that he had a problem in the first place, and anyone familiar with a narcissist would know that would never happen. The narcissist is never going to admit fault or admit that something as fundamental as his personality was flawed with a disorder. Imagine for a moment that you are friends with a narcissist. You may be the most emotionally intelligent individual in the world, but if the narcissist is not willing to work with you, even your own empathy is not enough in the long term to cope with the stress of the narcissist. The narcissist will always be so caught up in his own ego, demanding attention and support from other people and expecting lavish acknowledgment anywhere he goes, he will never be willing to put other people first. At some point, it becomes a matter of needing to move on past the narcissist without allowing it to bother you any longer. If you can do this, you will effectively allow yourself to step away from the disaster sooner rather than later. Yes, if you are emotionally intelligent or empathetic, this will go against any instincts that you have, which may be actively directing you toward helping the narcissist, but remember that helping will not do any good for someone who does not want to be saved. You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot force it to drink, and at the end of the day, the narcissist will never drink from any water that is meant to bring him back to earth. He would rather force the world to fit into his own method of thinking, expecting everyone else to make things easier for him rather than him having to change. He assumes that he is so incredibly valuable that people would do anything to keep him. Chapter 5: Intro to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Emotional intelligence itself can be an incredibly valuable skill set to develop, but what happens when you run into roadblocks? What if you feel like you cannot possibly continue to move forward in your attempts to become emotionally intelligent because your emotional state is too out of whack? Maybe you find that your self confidence is so incredibly poor that you cannot manage to even convince yourself that people actually genuinely like you. Maybe your anger keeps you down and you cannot figure out how best to regulate it. If you find that emotional intelligence becomes too difficult to push through, there may be an issue with your way of thinking. Luckily for you, you can fix that. All you will need to do is work through what is commonly known as cognitive behavioral therapy. CBT is a technique that is regularly used in several different aspects now, sort of as a cure all for many mental health disorders. People have seen improvements in several mental health issues with the use of CBT, ranging from depression and anxiety to even seeing a decrease in distress caused by schizophrenia. Even better, CBT is brief—the average session only lasts about 10 office visits, and then you are off on your own to keep managing yourself. Does this sound too good to be true? Despite how sweetly impossible that this sounds, it is legitimate and recognized by even the United States Military as a treatment plan for veterans with post traumatic stress disorder. This means that CBT is an effective way to treat several different disorders while also being incredibly brief, making it a dream come true to many people that do not want to spend their lives in therapy. Within this chapter, we will go over the most basic features of what cognitive behavioral therapy is, how it works, and why it is frequently used. Try to reserve judgment until the end of the chapter—despite the fact that it does sound like it is too good to be true, it is legitimate. What is CBT? Cognitive behavioral therapy is a form of psychotherapy. This means that it is primarily talk based in order to get to the root of what is going on in your mind. However, it differs greatly from what you may be used to thinking of when discussing therapy. Unlike how in traditional psychotherapy appointments, you may be sitting there, discussing random aspects of your life for weeks or months on end, CBT instead encourages you to make a handful of appointments to learn how to cope with whatever is bothering you. Effectively, CBT cuts out the middle man—instead of having the therapist figure out what the problem is and how to solve it, the therapist teaches the patient how to figure out that information for himself. The therapist will provide the patient with information on how best to recognize the signs of whatever may be suspected, as well as guide the patient through several coping mechanisms that are meant to help deal with the negative emotions in order to end problematic behaviors. CBT is so incredibly effective for three specific reasons: It is brief, action oriented and focused on the present rather than looking at past problems. Present focused Despite being brief, the patient is taught plenty of actionable information to help him or her cope with what is going on in life. They are taught to identify emotional states, understand what those states mean, and then learn to discredit those emotional states until they pass to avoid falling for any sort of impulsive emotional behaviors that could lead to problems later on. Along with being brief, it focuses specifically on actions. In CBT, you identify what the most problematic aspects of your life are and then you figure out how best to handle them. This may be through figuring out how to fend off anxiety, for example. If you are an anxious person, you may find that you are better off learning to treat that anxiety. That anxiety will be treated through methods like graded exposure or attempts to create affirmations or roleplays to eliminate the fear. Instead of essentially talking about the feeling until it no longer hurts ,;CBT seeks to figure out how to remove the power from the feeling altogether. In removing the power, it can no longer be harmful in the future, meaning that the problem is solved. However, the methods that are taught in CBT are open ended—just because that one anxiety problem is over does not mean that anxiety will never plague you again in the future, and for that particular reason, the actions that you are taught are never assigned to one particular behavior. If you are anxious, you may find use of that affirmation assignment, but what about if you were frustrated? Would that affirmation still help? Maybe if you wrote new one about your frustration, but that would be a fantastic idea. They are meant to be useful in several contexts in order to maximize usability. Finally, CBT really only focuses on present tense problems. While it would be foolish to believe that those suffering from anxiety have only had anxiety as a recent issue with a recent trigger, it is important to note that those who are suffering from anxiety should also be able to treat their current triggers without trying to figure out when it all started. After all, if the end goal here is to create strategies to cope with a specific symptom, does it matter when that symptom started? Does the cause of the broken bone really help the doctor re set your bone or make sure that it heals, right? Of course, it would be foolish to completely disregard the past—the past can provide important information that is incredibly insightful into the situation, but at the same time, it is imperative to remember that solving past traumas is not always more important than figuring out how to prevent new ones. When you allow someone to develop a strategy toward healing, you are making it clear that they are able to cope in the moment. You make sure that if that person has a panic attack, those CBT techniques are there right then to help them out of that panic attack. Figuring out the direct cause and start of the panic attacks is not as important in the short term, and CBT takes exactly that stance. How CBT Works Ultimately, CBT works primarily because it takes a close look at how behaviors and thoughts are innately related to each other. While it may intentionally hone in on behaviors, that is more because behaviors are far simpler to observe than any other forms. You can tell what someone is doing at a glance but you cannot always tell the emotional tone of someone just by their glance. This cycle between behaviors and thoughts actually has one more point—it is the thoughts feelings behaviors chart. Effectively, our thoughts influence our feelings. If you think that you are useless, you will feel like you have no self confidence. Without self confidence, you will not be willing to apply for that job that you really need. If you do not apply to that job, you obviously never get that job, and you are once again caught up in how horrible you are and how much you wish that you could change yourself into someone else. aay Actions Thoughts Feelings That means that the cycle has officially come full circle. You thought that you were useless, felt like you were useless, were useless as a direct result of those thoughts, and then continued to use that as evidence of how useless you are. This is exactly why negative feelings can be so incredibly difficult to leave implanted in someone else—when they are there, that other person is going to have to work incredibly hard to get those negative feelings out in a process that is known as cognitive restructuring. Cognitive restructuring is effectively the backbone of CBT at this point—it is the ability to stop, analyze your own thoughts, and then change your own thoughts with other techniques. In doing so, you may find that it actually does, in fact, work. The reason it works is because it breaks into that cycle mentioned above—if negative thoughts make negative feelings, which makes for negative behavior, what happens if there is a shift to positive feelings instead? For example, what if you replaced the thought of being useless with a thought about trying hard to change your tendencies as a negative individual? If you were to change that particular thought, you would need to somehow get it implanted into your brain and then figure out the best way to constantly be reinforcing it. At first, that positive thought is in your mind, but you find it difficult to use. This makes sense—It is a difficult subject to approach and yet approaching it is the only right choice. So, after insisting that you are trying your hardest in life and seeing the girl from the bar that you failed to strike up a conversation with despite your desires to do so, you build up that resolve and approach her. Of course, just approaching, something you were terrified of doing, is enough to help you start to feel a little more confident and successful. Your thought processes begin to help you become successful. You find that the more positive language that you use, the more positive you feel. The more positive that you feel, the more likely you feel to actually behave in a positive manner. Effectively, then, you are able to defeat key issues in your life, one at a time. Do you have anxiety? You can figure out how to eliminate that anxious response from the internet or a book like this one. Are you lonely and want to find a date? You can do that too, so long as you actively go out of your way to try to do so. No matter what your mental health issue is, there is almost always a way that you can use CBT to better cope with it in some way or another. It is important to note, however, if you are going to be using CBT, it needs to be reinforced regularly. You want to ensure that it remains effective, and the best way to do so is to repeatedly flex the muscles that you would use involving CBT in the first place. This means that if CBT helps you with anxiety, use it with your anxiety symptoms as much as you can. Even if you feel like the symptoms are not that bad, try to use them. You will find that you are able to reinforce them better and more effectively simply by using them on the regular. Why CBT is Used Ultimately, CBT is used for several important reasons. At its root, what it does is identify and change negative thinking patterns and with that in mind, it is important to recognize just how powerful that is. Negative thinking patterns spread negativity throughout your life. The more negatively that you think, the more negativity you will find infesting your life. This is perhaps the primary use of CBT. However, think about all of the areas in your life in which negative thinking may hurt your behaviors? Imagine how you feel when your anxiety flares up—is there a negative thought behind it? Most likely. Do you have anger issues? There may very well be some negative thoughts underlying those as well. At the end of the day, the only way to know where the negative thoughts are is to figure out how to identify them—and CBT does that. Negative thoughts can cause all sorts of problems. You may find that negative thinking causes an eating disorder or a phobia. It could cause drug or alcohol misuse, or lead to struggles with all sorts of personality disorders. Effectively, however, the best way to figure out whether a negative thought is at the root of any reason that you are struggling is through plenty of self reflection. Negative Thinking and CBT Negative thinking is typically quite rigid—you cannot change it despite any efforts that you make to do exactly that. No matter how hard you try, you may find that you are caught up in the negativity. Unfortunately, however, recognizing negative thinking is something that is incredibly difficult if you do not understand what you are doing. You need to be able to recognize your negative thoughts if you hope to ever have a chance to help eliminate them. When there are negative thoughts in your life, you may find that rather than actually recognizing the negativity, all you recognize is that life is going wrong somewhere for you. You do not see that the thought is at the root— just that nothing seems to work out. You may find that you are repeatedly rejected from job interviews, or find that you constantly struggle to get people to hang out with you. In the end, you find that you feel all alone with no clear idea of how to fix it. Finding the negative though in your life is probably the best, most clear cut method to ensuring that you can identify the reason everything seems to be going wrong. The process to do this can take a while, but it is absolutely worth doing. To start, figure out when the last time that you were incredibly upset or angry was. Do you remember what caused the feelings? Write down as much as you can about the situation on the paper. Perhaps you remember that you were upset over the fact that your friend would not hang out with you again, after having already cancelled on you twice in the last week. It left you feeling incredibly upset and worthless, and in response, you spiraled into all sorts of negative thinking. You told yourself that you failed as a friend, and that is exactly why your friends keep bailing on you. You told yourself that you are impossible to get along with and that those around you will never want to. You may have told yourself that you hate who you are, which only pushed you deeper into negativity. Now that you have that out on your paper, ask yourself to summarize that entire paragraph written down to one sentence: “I am a bad friend.” With that thought in mind, can you figure out why it matters? What makes that thought so powerful? Why does it matter so much? The answer is likely something about how you feel like you are a worthless person or something along those lines. Ask why that matters, and continue to reduce down your realization over and over again. You want to keep asking yourself what that previous sentence says about you until you reach the point of having a sentence that is entirely about you: “T am a bad person,” for example. That right there is a core thought. A core thought is a thought that you have that underlies everything else. It is effectively the unconscious bias about a situation or setting that pushes you to behave in a certain way or to think in a certain way. In this case, your thought of being a bad person pushed yourself to think that your friend hated you, wanted nothing to do with you, and would have been happier with you gone forever. Was any of that actually true? Most likely not, and yet you could not help but think it anyway. Nevertheless, with that thought process in mind, it is important to write it down. Record that core thought and keep it close for now. You are going to be analyzing it to determine whether it is negative or simply problematic. Negative automatic core thoughts are effectively some of the most destructive that you can have, and if you are able to identify them, cognitive restructuring is always the way to go. You can do the restructuring in the process that is provided in this book, or you can attempt to do so with the help of a therapist. Ultimately, all that matters is that you succeed in eliminating the automatic thought once and for all. Now that you have your core thought written down, it is time to figure out if it is a negative thought or not. You can do this by simply running it through a checklist. This checklist will be your sort of cheat sheet—it will contain the most common forms of negative thinking patterns so you can cross check your own core thought to determine if it is problematic. If it is problematic, you will want to change that thought as quickly and as effectively as you can without risking waiting too long. There are dozens of negative thinking patterns, but for the most part, they will fall into one of ten categories. These categories are all or nothing thinking, focusing on the negatives, pessimism, need for approval, negative self labeling, catastrophizing, dwelling on the past, mind reading, focusing on the should, and disqualifying the present. Each of these serves its own purpose. Let’s take a short look at each of these ten negative thinking patterns to get a good idea of what they are in action. All or nothing thinking involves you telling yourself that you must do things one way and anything short of that one perfected manner is a failure. If you do not get 100% on that test, then you have failed it. Effectively, this is perfectionism written into a thought. Focusing on the negative involves putting an excessive amount of effort into the bad part of a situation. If you had a date and it rained, for example, you may focus on all of the negativity—it rained, so you couldn’t go for that romantic walk. Your shoes got all wet and dirty and now you need to scrub them. The whole day and date were a complete failure. In reality, the other person was thrilled to spend the time with you and would have happily described the date as good. Pessimism is quite similar to focusing on the negative. Unlike how focusing on the negative was looking at the past, pessimism focuses on the future with a negative outlook. If something goes wrong, you constantly think that something bad is going to happen in response. If anything is successful, you believe it is for sure, only going to be temporary before falling apart as well. A need for approval is a definite sign of low self esteem or major personal damage. When you need approval from other people, you feel like the only value you have is tied up in how other people see you. If you are not liked, you are not worthy of anything. Negative self labeling is the act of telling yourself that you are something that is negative or bad. You may tell yourself that you are a waste of space or that you would even waste space in the garbage can and that your only value would be in disappearing. This is usually incredibly disparaging toward yourself and is incredibly harmful. Catastrophizing is the act of telling yourself that it will always be the worst case scenario that happens. Things will never go well—you will always fail. Dwelling on the past is quite similar to focusing on the negative, but the difference is that when you dwell, you are actively telling yourself that the problem is in the past and that you cannot fix it. Instead of looking toward the future and seeing that there are solutions for you out there, you are actively avoiding making any real progress. Instead, you say that you may as well continue to beat yourself up over that mistake so you can eventually feel better. Mind reading is the mistake of deciding that you know exactly what is going through the minds of others. Instead of seeing that other people have privacy to their own minds and that there is no way you could ever figure out what is going on inside it without asking, and even then, you cannot guarantee anything, you decide that you know exactly what the problem is —you are the problem. You do not need any evidence for this; you simply decide that you are the problem because you know it. Focusing on the ‘shoulds’ involves getting so caught up in the fact that life should be fair and people should have access to the same basic amenities. However, life is not fair. It has never been fair. Some people win and some lose, and ultimately, you need to accept that. It sucks to not get what someone else gets, but that is life. Disqualifying the present is the exact opposite of focusing on the past. When you do this, you actively trap yourself into telling yourself that you will take care of yourself or do something for yourself in the future after you have already had the chance to figure out what was going on at that moment. With that list of negative thoughts, it is time to start figuring out how likely your own thought fits into one of the listed categories. If you say that you are a bad person, you are likely falling for negative self labeling at the very lest. You are telling yourself that you are something that you are not. No one ever said you were a bad person. You also fell for the negative thinking of mind reading. Your friend never said why they canceled, and you assumed that it was because of you being a bad person and that it always happens that way. Effectively, the more time that you spend dwelling and trying to figure things out, the more negative thought patterns that you inadvertently dig up just through realizing that they qualify. In identifying that negative thought, however, you do make it clear that what you need is cognitive restructuring to destroy it. The cognitive restructuring process has several steps and does take time, but it is absolutely critical to beginning to defeat those negative thought processes once and for all. You can do it if you are willing and able to go through the effort. Begin by calming yourself down—you want to make sure that you are able to relax. You can do this through meditation or a breathing exercise if you want to, or you can simply wait until you are calmed down enough to begin. You can skip the next two steps if you have already gone through identifying negative thoughts. If you are skipping the identification of negative thoughts prior, you can continue. With a state of calmness, identify what caused the negativity in the first place. What happened? What triggered the negativity that you are feeling right at that moment? Write it all down for yourself—you want to figure out the moods that you had so you can begin to reflect on it later. After all, emotions are incredibly powerful. In this case, you may write down that the problem is that your friend stood you up and you feel angry, lonely, and embarrassed that you are constantly being canceled on. Next, it is time to identify your automatic thoughts. This was the step in which you made it through your natural chain of events with the argument with yourself. You told yourself that you were not good enough and eventually arrived at the conclusion of not being good enough. At this point, it is time to begin again if you have already worked on finding negative thoughts earlier in the chapter. You will be finding any evidence that supports the negative thought that you had. If you are such a bad person, how can you prove it? You will need to look at the situation entirely objectively and figure out how best to prove that thought to yourself somehow. Do your best to do this. You may write down that if you were left out, you were obviously not wanted by the group to begin with, along with some other comments that are meant to support whatever you have declared. From there you need to figure out if there is any contradicting evidence. What can you do to prove that thought wrong? How can you prove that you are not a bad person? This is important—this is where you start to acknowledge that the negative thought is wrong or flawed. You may tell yourself that your evidence is that people always say hi to you when you get to work, or that your cubicle neighbor brought you mini cupcakes and a balloon on your birthday. You may remind yourself that your friends do usually make time for you, but it is a busy part of the year, and you had admittedly canceled a few times as well simply because the business was just too much to keep up with at that point in time. As you write these thoughts down, compare them to the list of thoughts that you had set up for yourself as evidence of your negative thought. How much actually fits there? Was it actually fair to yourself to tell yourself that you are not liked, wanted, or that you are a bad person? Ultimately, it is incredibly unfair to you to put that standard on you, but you will arrive at that conclusion shortly. Now that you have your two lists, it is time to weigh them. Which side seems to be more accurate? In all honesty with yourself, you would have to agree that the thoughts being discredited seemed more rational, reasonable, and honest. At this point, you should feel a little bit better. You are able to remind yourself of exactly how the thoughts that you initially had were wrong or negative and should be avoided. At this point, it is time to try to help yourself continue to feel better. Write down what you have done and the end results of your process of self reflection. See how you feel after doing that. Remind yourself that the balanced outlook was far better for you. Ask yourself how to avoid falling down that chain of negative thinking again in the future, and then remind yourself that it is important for you to offer yourself some compassion every now and then. Finally, to help reiterate your newfound viewpoint of the situation, it can help to create some affirmations. These affirmations will exist as your sort of reminder that things are not as bad as they may initially seem and that you can keep your thinking in the positive if you work at it enough. Affirmations will be addressed in depth later in this book in Chapter 8: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques to Eliminate Anxiety. Chapter 6: Cognitive Therapy and Behavioral Therapy Cognitive behavioral therapy acts as a sort of bridge between both cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy. Drawing from both, it finds ways to understand and influence behavior in methods that would not entirely be possible without them both. Effectively, when you are using cognitive behavioral therapy, you are using one of the most powerful, influential forms of therapy for the time. It takes the best of cognitive therapy, recognizing that we are a sum of our thoughts and that our thoughts influence our behaviors. It also recognizes that our thoughts are directly influenced by the environment around us, one of the facets of behavioral therapy. When you are using CBT, you are effectively getting all of the benefits of both therapies at the same time, and the result is incredibly effective. It is difficult to argue with statistics that strongly support the effectiveness and veracity of CBT as a therapy—it is active and effective, allowing for the reconstruction of both thoughts and behaviors. In the end, in tackling both perspectives at the same time, people get a treatment method that is able to handle nearly anything. The best way to understand CBT, however, is to look at each of its components. Within this chapter, we will seek to understand both cognitive and behavioral therapies, allowing you to see what the main purposes of both of them are. In seeing the expectations and tendencies of both therapies outlined for you, you may realize that CBT is the sort of perfect blend between the two, and that is what makes it so incredibly powerful. Understanding Cognitive Therapy Cognitive therapy itself is best understood by the idea that the individual’s thoughts are influential to the individual’s feelings. Within this perspective, the emotional response felt is typically a direct response to a situation at hand. Effectively, your feelings are usually caused by your thoughts on a Situation. Imagine that you are greatly afraid of dogs. You were bitten as a young child and never managed to overcome the overwhelming fear that washes over you when you see another dog that is larger than a Chihuahua. In this instance, you have just found yourself exposed to someone walking a Great Dane down the road .The dog is perfectly well behaved, but you cannot seem to tolerate the sight of it. Your heart starts to race. You feel your breathing grow shallow and rapid. You look around you and there is no clear escape from the individual without dipping into someone’s yard and trying to get into an alleyway. You are effectively trapped. You can keep walking toward the dog, or you can walk in the same direction as the dog, but either way, you are going to be stuck in close proximity to it. Now, if you had randomly felt those symptoms sitting around and doing nothing, you may have been concerned that there was something wrong with you medically—it is always distressing to have that racing heart and the shortness of breath. However, in this instance, you are well acquainted with the feeling—anxiety. You are feeling anxiety at the situation because you are afraid of the dog. In cognitive therapy, the therapist asserts that the reason that you are afraid is not that dogs are inherently scary, but rather because your thoughts about the dog make it scary. Effectively, your thoughts are directly swaying your feelings. You have negative thoughts surrounding dogs, stemming from the attack that you suffered, and despite knowing that, you can still never seem to overcome your phobia in any meaningful way. You still feel that same sense of panic when approached by a dog. Effectively, cognitive therapy states that the thoughts that you have surrounding that dog is biased and, therefore, not particularly suitable for functionality. You then build up your own negative thoughts surrounding the situation, and those thoughts color your emotions. This means, however, that you can tackle that fear relatively easily—all you need to do is figure out how best to address the situation. You can learn to process your thoughts in order to free your feelings once and for all. When you are in cognitive therapy, you are directly being taught by your therapist to develop new skillsets to help you. The skillset in particular that you will be learning includes several abilities and concepts familiar to anyone that knows their cognitive behavioral therapy. You will learn how to tell the difference between thoughts and feelings, which will enable you to remove the power from many of those negative thoughts as they arise. When you can tell the difference between the two, you can acknowledge that you are not actually frightened of the dog, you are frightened because you think the dog is scary. You discover the cycle in which thoughts, including automatic thoughts, influence feelings, and how that can be problematic if the thoughts that you have driving your feelings are negative. These negative or distorted thoughts can be incredibly problematic in nearly any context. They will make it next to impossible for you to actively manage the situations at hand, and correcting those thoughts is crucial if you hope to be able to manage your emotions. You will discover how to critically evaluate your automatic thoughts in order to determine if they are accurate or biased. In knowing that some of the thoughts that you are having are biased, you can begin to overcome them, defeating them with the reminders of their biased nature. Effectively, this teaches you to figure out how to interrupt and restructure your biased thoughts as they arise, allowing you to better your emotional state. Cognitive Therapy e Thoughts determine feelings e Understanding how thoughts influence feelings gives the power to defend against these feelings e Negative automatic thoughts are primarily at fault for neagtive feelings Understanding Behavioral Therapy Behavioral therapy, on the other hand, seeks to identify how any thoughts that you have get rewarded or reinforced over time, even if by accident. Within the behavioral therapy perspective, you are able to acknowledge that sometimes, we accidentally reinforce negative thoughts and biases, and in reinforcing them, we make them that much more likely to continue. For example, let’s go back to being afraid of dogs—you are terrified of the dogs that you encounter from day to day. This is typical. However, every time that you respond in a manner that is afraid of dogs, you avoid a negative interaction with the dog. This then leads to your fear of being reinforced. You may also run into the problem of reinforcing your fear every time you read an article online about how dogs have attacked or maimed people in your general vicinity. Overall, you constantly find yourself struggling to interact with dogs, and the longer your fear lasts, the longer you reinforce it. A slightly different version of this is in recognizing the ways in which you can run into a problem with children. For example, imagine that you have a child that regularly throws temper tantrums when he wants something. You do not want to give in to what he wants and you do your best to avoid it. However, occasionally, you feel like it is not worth the battle and you simply give in to the boy instead, feeling like it is preferable to the option of simply refusing and dealing with the headache surrounding standing your ground. Although you may see this as attempting to avoid a tantrum that you simply do not want to put up with because you are tired, your child has just been reinforced. You made it clear that if your child threatens to throw a fit, he gets what he wants. His behavior just reinforced his thoughts. Behavior Therapy è Behaviors that are reinforced get repeated e Negative behaviors have been inadvertently reinforced into being repeated e New behaviors must be encouraged to replace the negative ones When Cognitive and Behavioral Therapy Collide Now, consider what this means for CBT—you can see aspects of both cognitive and behavioral therapy in what has formed with CBT. In particular, you recognize that the cognitive therapy concept of thoughts influencing feelings being involved. You see that therapy is meant to be actionable and designed to restructure thoughts in order to change the feelings. When you restructure thoughts, you are actively engaging in one of the primary principles of CBT—you are making sure that you tackle problematic negative thoughts and turn them instead into something functional. Now look at behavioral therapy—in particular, you see the idea that behaviors reinforce thoughts. This is the last half of the cycle in CBT that involves thoughts, behaviors, and feelings. When you are able to acknowledge this cycle, you can begin to engage in all of the processes that CBT boasts as being it’s most effective. The behavioral portion of CBT encourages people to try new things, allowing for the creation of positive associations, such as through acts like goal setting and behavior activation, in which you are able to actively begin to create new behavioral patterns and reinforce them, allowing them to become as automatic as the negative ones. Essentially, CBT wanted to combine the two, bridging the gaps and making use of all techniques and possibilities. Within CBT, you see that people are taught to restructure their own thoughts, but they are also taught to avoid reinforcing negative thoughts. You are able to ensure that you are actively working toward bettering who you are, what you want, and how you will get it all because you will be tackling the problem from two different perspectives to ensure that the end results are as effective as possible. yioral Thera Chapter 7: Anxiety Imagine that you are sitting at home, minding your own business when your heart starts to race. You had been just fine moments prior and now you cannot help but feel that sense of panic and dread within you—you cannot shake the feeling that you are being followed, watched, or being threatened, and no matter how much you walk yourself through the logic of why you are safe and not needing to worry, you find that the feeling of dread will not pass. You do your best to mitigate it, and yet you cannot help but feel like you are stuck. Your best attempts do nothing and you begin to wonder if you are actually dying, in danger, or otherwise threatened or compromised. In reality, you are perfectly okay, physically. You are feeling the sensation of anxiety. This is your body’s natural response to stress, during which you are actively afraid of what is to come. Your anxiety triggers could be anything—arguing, bills coming due, or even an offhanded comment toward your partner about something entirely irrelevant to everything. What is true and constant, however, is the overwhelming, terrifying sensation that you are in real danger. When you are anxious, you are suffering from a mental health disorder. This does not mean that you should feel ashamed—you cannot help that your body is reacting in this way. However, you can reclaim your body and begin to treat it. This chapter will guide you through understanding anxiety as a disorder, walk you through the most common disorders there are, and then discuss how CBT is a valid solution for those suffering from anxiety. In the next chapter, you will be provided with three techniques that you can use in order to begin taking back your life and fighting off that anxiety once and for all. While it can be intimidating to try to figure out how to help yourself, know that you are doing the best that you can by making an effort to heal who you are and change the patterns through which you will live your life. You will be able to heal yourself and ensure that you are able to be happy and healthy once more. What is Anxiety? Anxiety is, first and foremost, a feeling. It is the feeling of apprehension and fear of what is going to come next. You fear what will happen and react accordingly. Effectively, your mind is on overdrive, feeling like there is a threat, even if that threat is imaginary. In response to that threat, your body has several options. It can choose to fight, it can choose to flee, or it can choose to freeze. Typically, when you are suffering from anxiety, your body has chosen flight as its proper response—it wants to get you as far away from the situation as possible by making you as uncomfortable as possible. Essentially, anxiety is a state o nearly constant vigilance. When you are afraid for your life, you are not going to be able to rest—you will actively be searching for any signs that you were correct and that there really is a threat to your safety present somewhere nearby. When you are able to remain vigilant, you are effectively making it a point to defend yourself from all angles. However, keep in mind the massive amount of stress that this would put anyone under. When you are stressed out about how to approach people, or even just how to live life, you are not going to be very happy. You are going to struggle in nearly any interactions, constantly worrying about whether this will be the one to trigger your anxiety or make continuing on with your life impossible. Very quickly, that anxiety spirals out of control, and you find that it is impossible to remain clearheaded and capable. Of all the mental health disorders that you could ever have, anxiety is the most common. It is pervasive—it arises over the course of several different interactions and in several constant situations. It is problematic—it makes normal functioning impossible. Finally, it is also debilitating. It is possible for those who suffer from anxiety to find that instead of being able to protect themselves and ensure that they are taking care of themselves, they are going to be suffering from those feelings of fear and trying to escape it. Anxiety Disorders Anxiety exists in a multitude of forms. You can have panic disorder, in which certain stimuli actively trigger you to panic and act as if your very life is being threatened. You can have a phobia or social anxiety. Ultimately, at the end of the day, the end result is still the same: You are still afraid of what is going to happen and you are still struggling to figure out how best to cope. When you are actively afraid of what is around you, you can hardly expect to function effectively. This section will help you identify several of the most common anxiety disorders. As you read, however, keep in mind that the information included in this chapter does not substitute for a proper, licensed medical professional’s diagnosis and opinion. If you think that you may be suffering from anxiety, the best course of action is always to make sure that you get a proper diagnosis from a medical professional who has had the opportunity to both understand your symptoms through interacting with you, but is also able to supervise over the process of treating you. While it is great to use this book as a guide, it is even more beneficial to your treatment plan to seek professional medical advice from someone that can see the whole picture and interact to create something tailored to you specifically. Panic disorder is a common anxiety disorder in which people experience repeated panic attacks entirely unexpectedly. These attacks are sudden, powerful, and incredibly draining, leaving the individual feeling like he or she may be dying when in reality, their anxiety is creating symptoms that are incredibly reminiscent of cardiac arrest. People who suffer from panic disorder find that they suffer from at least one panic attack per month, and they are beginning to be fearful of the idea of having another panic attack. Effectively, knowing that there is an opportunity for another panic attack is enough to trigger more anxiety. These panic attacks show up without warning, with symptoms such as heart palpitations, struggling to breathe, a sensation of choking, lightheadedness, dizziness, and chest pain, among others. These symptoms usually arise with no discernable reason and occur in ways that are incredibly powerful. They leave the individual functioning in fear of another attack. Phobias are another form of anxiety that manifests as an irrational, excessive fear of one specific trigger. This trigger could be something physical, such as a specific animal or person, or it could be a bit more abstract, such as the fear of a thought or the fear of a feeling. In fact, some people even find that they may end up living in fear of leaving home, something else that can be incredibly problematic. When you suffer from a phobia, you are not just slightly afraid of whatever is happening—you are deathly afraid of it. For example, consider the scenario of being afraid of dogs. If you are so afraid of the dog that you let it control your life, intentionally and deliberately avoiding the dog by crossing the street or changing your routine, you may suffer from a phobia. Most of the time, these phobias do directly impact your ability to function. They interfere with your ability to recognize situations in a healthy manner. Generalized Anxiety Disorder is what most people usually think about when they think of anxiety—it is characterized by random bouts of feelings of anxiety that are oftentimes unpredictable, while other times being quite obvious. When you suffer from generalized anxiety disorder, most of the time, you cannot help it. You cannot figure out how best to function and cannot shake the feeling without help. Thankfully, that help is available to you. If you feel like you suffer from a constant overarching feeling of anxiety that you cannot explain, you are not alone, and you do not have to suffer endlessly. You can treat this problem. Post traumatic stress disorder is the development of severe anxiety symptoms in direct response to some sort of trauma. It is not known exactly what causes PTSD to arise, as not everyone who has suffered a trauma goes through it. When you suffer from PTSD, you find that you have an intense avoidance of anything even remotely reminiscent of whatever trauma you have experienced. You may suffer from intrusive thoughts, such as flashbacks or nightmares related to the trauma, or you may find that, despite your best attempts, you cannot shake the need to obsessively avoid anything reminiscent of the trauma in the first place. Keep in mind that, while commonly associated with the military, you do not actually have to serve in the military to suffer from PTSD any trauma, ranging from sexual assault to surviving a major accident can result in the symptoms. CBT and Anxiety Ultimately, CBT is an incredibly effective method through which you can treat your anxiety. When you use CBT to tackle your anxiety issues, you are tackling the issue from two ends. You spend time identifying problematic thoughts that may have become distorted over time, and you also spend time actively attempting to reinforce positive behaviors. If you are actively suffering from anxiety, cognitive behavioral therapy is one of the best therapies you can choose in order to alleviate the symptoms. Through CBT, you will learn how to act accordingly—you will be given several tools for managing those feelings of negativity and anxiety to remove the discomfort and distress that goes along with them. For example, if your anxiety tends to express itself through the massive feelings of panic, a racing heart, and a fear of dying, CBT can help you eliminate the distress behind those symptoms. Effectively, CBT would teach you that it is okay to feel that way, but ultimately, your anxiety is little more than feelings to begin with. This means that if you want to treat it, there are several options for you. You can choose to use affirmations to remove the discomfort, reminding you that you are safe. You can choose to expose yourself to your triggers in hopes of desensitizing yourself form the symptoms altogether. You can even choose to spend time practicing through several worst case scenarios in order to figure out the best possible approach to your symptoms. No matter what you choose, however, there will always be the option to revisit another method if necessary. You will be able to choose to instead behave in other ways and slowly habituate those new behaviors. Over time, you will see relief. While it may have been difficult to first begin the process of treating your anxiety, you should always remember that it takes real strength to treat a mental health disorder and that you should not be ashamed under any circumstances. Rather, you should be proud of yourself to be willing to give yourself a chance. Chapter 8: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques to Eliminate Anxiety Once diagnosed with anxiety, you may wonder what comes next. Luckily, what comes next is effectively just skills building. You will be spending the time to learn new skills that you can use to claim and tame your anxiety once and for all. These three methods of treatment, the ability to create affirmations, graded exposure, and using what if roleplays will all be particularly effective in ensuring that, no matter what the situation, you are able to tame that anxiety. Even if you have not yet been diagnosed, but you feel le you are probably well on your way to getting that diagnosis, it can really help to begin to process of tackling those anxiety triggers early on. From here on out, it is assumed that you are already familiar with the art of identifying problematic thoughts—this ability to use introspection will be crucial to your ability to succeed. Since this process was introduced in Chapter 5, you should already have a general idea of how best to identify these thoughts. When you know what your problematic thoughts are, you can begin to tackle them. Affirmations Affirmations are little more than short statements that you repeat to yourself during a moment of weakness. Effectively, your affirmation should directly counter a negative thought that you are suffering from in a way that helps you to stay focused on what you want and grounded to your truest emotions instead of just trying to squeak past the sensation of anxiety in the first place. In particular, affirmations are one of the simplest methods that you can use. All you need to identify is to ensure that it meets three simple requirements. You must make sure that your affirmation is positive—it must be something that is written in a way that it will not further sink your thinking into the negative. Your affirmation must also be present tense—it needs to address something in the here and now in order to help you in the present. For example, if you are afraid of dogs, you need to make sure that your affirmation addresses that you are safe right at that minute when you are reciting your affirmation. In ensuring that you know this, you are able to recognize that the affirmation is true without denying it on some sort of grammatical technicality. Finally, your affirmation must be personal. When your affirmation sari personal, you can make them come true. When they are not personal, however, and they are actively about other people, such s telling yourself that your friends or family members love you, you can begin to doubt that. That is not to say that your friends and family do not love you, but rather, you have no way to verify the mind of someone else, and in the moments of doubt, when your mind is already lying to you, that would be an easy topic to lie about. You would be able o tell yourself that no, you do not believe that your friend loves you because you cannot prove it, and suddenly, your perfectly crafted affirmation falls apart. When you would like to use affirmations, you must simply make sure that your statement lives up to those three requirements. If it does, you are ready to move on to the next step—using your affirmation. When you are ready to use the affirmation, you must make sure ultimately that you repeat the affirmation regularly. It is a common form of manipulation to effectively insert thoughts into the mind of another with ease, with the only requirement being that you need to repeat it so much that it becomes the truth. This means that if you actively repeat the same positive message to yourself over and over again, you should be able to convince yourself to sort of absorb the knowledge to use it. The best way to do this is to pair your affirmation with an activity that you are already doing regularly. Perhaps you decide to repeat whatever your affirmation si every single time that you wash your hands. After all, you likely wash your hands on a regular basis throughout the day and you need to make use of that. When you wash your hands, you must then repeat that affirmation to yourself at least ten times. Every time you wash your hands, you then repeat that affirmation. Over the days, weeks, and months, you find that you are constantly repeating it to yourself and over time, it becomes reflexive. Every time that you wash your hands, your affirmation is repeated to yourself out of habit, despite not thinking about it. That is when it really begins to work—it has infiltrated your unconscious mind and will then begin to act accordingly. On top of the repetition in order to internalize everything, you must also make it a point to use your affirmation during moments of weakness. If you find that you are afraid of a dog, you recite it to yourself in order to remind yourself that the fear that you have is unwarranted or unnecessary. Over time, you do begin to believe it. Graded Exposure Graded exposure refers to essentially what is commonly known as exposure therapy. In graded exposure, you are making it a point to slowly expose yourself to whatever it is that you are afraid of in hopes of slowly removing the fear that you have. You do this through incremental increases in your exposure to the item or stimulus, getting closer and closer to the stimulus over time. For example, you start out by looking at photographs of big dogs playing outside to start. As you go through graded exposure, you are going to slowly acclimate to each exposure level, and in doing so, you will eventually be able to tolerate that level of exposure. Every time that you find that you can tolerate the exposure, it is time to up the increment to the next level, allowing you to then push your limits and continue to become more and more comfortable. For example, you start with those photographs of dogs. You are to view them regularly until the simple sight of a dog is not enough to send your heart racing. Then, you must move on to looking at videos of dogs. This should bring back more of your anxiety as it is slightly more realistic than actively looking at a photograph. In looking at the videos, over time, you will find that you are able to comfortably tolerate it. You are then ready to move up another level. You may then choose to hold a stuffed animal dog in order to sort of expose yourself further to the stimulus. Doing should still be uncomfortable for you, but the more you go through this process, the more smoothly you will find each of the stages to be. After the plush dog, you then move on to seeing actual dogs in action. Perhaps you stand on the other side of a fence from a small dog that is calm and well behaved so you know it will not be charging at you in an attempt to get you to do something or to harass you. After a while, you are able to move on to actually approach the dog, and eventually, you may even find that you are comfortable petting it. From there, it may just be a matter of exposing yourself to larger and larger dogs, slowly working your way up to having a dog that is quite large in your presence without the triggering of your anxiety symptoms. If you do this the right way, you will eventually find that you can, at the very least, tolerate the presence of a dog. You may never be fully comfortable around the dogs in your life, but that is okay. What is important is ensuring that you are not living your life in hiding because you are terrified of being around other people’s pets. Ultimately, whether you like it or not, dogs are incredibly common and you must be able to put up with their presence in the real world. When you use graded exposure, you are effectively teaching yourself that it is okay to be afraid, so long as you can be comfortable in your fear. Usually, graded exposure is used in tandem with other techniques such as grounding in order to add a level of security. With techniques such as grounding, you will find that you are able to better cope with all of the negativity that otherwise threatens to overwhelm you. In being able to cope with the negativity, you will find that you can actually combat and counter your phobias through this technique. What If Roleplays Finally, the last technique for mastering anxiety involves figuring out what the worst case scenario in a situation actually is. From there, you must role play it out in order to figure out if it is actually as bad as you may initially be convinced. For example, imagine that your anxiety surrounds ordering drinks at the café. You know that you need the drink, but you are too shy to order, fearing that other people will judge your taste in drink. Because of this, you tend to avoid cafes altogether, despite having a massive caffeine addiction. When you use a what if roleplay, though, you are effectively asking yourself probing questions that are designed to identify whether you can actually trust your judgment. You may be thoroughly convinced that the idea of ordering a coffee is the worst thing possible because you just know that you will mess up their special schema of how they size the drinks and everyone will laugh at you. Effectively, your anxiety tells you that you cannot possibly order a drink because it will flare up your social anxiety. It is then your job to ask yourself what the worst case scenario is. You would likely identify the act of everyone laughing at you as the worst case scenario and then move on to say that everyone around you only wants to use you for entertainment. Now, in trying to figure out what if, you must now ask yourself what that would matter. Does it matter why the people may laugh? Does being laughed at really matter? Ultimately, no, not really. While being laughed at is distressing, it is not distressing enough to warrant rearranging your entire life to accommodate for it. In this instance, then, you find that you are far better off moving forward with desensitizing yourself. Chapter 9: Depression Along with anxiety, depression can be a debilitating mental health issue. Commonly known as major depressive disorder, depression tends to encompass the feelings of hopelessness and despair that would otherwise go along with the feelings of inadequacy that an individual may be suffering from. Imagine that, no matter how comfortable your current home, job, or life, you cannot feel any joy. You find that the day is largely meaningless to you and that the night is not much better. You know that you should have energy, but all you want to do is spend your time lying in bed and refusing to do anything at all. You are far happier just left to your own devices in bed without doing anything. Depression is harmful. It causes people to struggle with motivation as well as finding hope and joy in life to continue moving forward. When you feel depressed, you struggle with anything and everything to do with other people and with yourself. Most people tend to think that depression is one of those willpower things—all you need to do is pick yourself up by your bootstraps and continue on. However, remember, the root of being able to pick yourself up from your bootstraps was meant to mock an impossibility. Just as you cannot literally pick yourself up from your bootstraps, you cannot just will yourself out of depression. What is Depression? Depression is an intense sadness, with feelings of worthlessness and hopelessness. It is characterized by at least five symptoms within a two week period of time. These symptoms are primarily a lack of energy, such as being depressed during the day, especially in the morning, or feeling like you lack energy. Other symptoms relate to how you feel about yourself— when you are depressed, you tend to feel like you are worthless or guilty regularly. It also had several physical aspects as well—you may struggle to sleep regularly, or you feel like you sleep too much, or you feel like you are slow and sluggish, or you start to see changes in your weight. There are also aspects such as suddenly having a frequent thought about death or even suicide. Ultimately, several of these symptoms come together when diagnosing depression, and they are incredibly problematic. These symptoms leave you feeling restless and like life is no longer enjoyable. You may find that you are suffering from several physical symptoms, such as being uncomfortable in your body, having headaches, struggling with digestion, or generally just hurting. You may find that things that once brought you joy, such as hobbies, enjoyable food, and sex are no longer of any interest to you, and you would much rather withdraw from the world rather than facing anyone head on. This is problematic. When you are able to fall into depression, your quality of life plummets and you are at an increased risk of thoughts of self harm or suicide, both of which are incredibly dangerous. In fact, because self harm thoughts are so common with depression, you must be ready to recognize it for what it is—a medical emergency. Any time that you feel like you may be a danger to yourself or other people, you should always contact emergency services to ensure that you get the care that you need to survive and thrive. Keep in mind that depression, while it is valid, is different than sadness or grief. It is possible for sadness or grief to eventually turn into depression, but noting that difference early on is critical. You must be able to recognize that oftentimes, depression begins with the arrival of a negative event of some sort. You may have lost a family member or gone through a messy divorce. In response, it is normal for you to feel sadness. In fact, sadness and grief are entirely normal human emotions. However, it is not normal for grief and sadness to be entirely consuming. At some point, grief transforms from something normal into something that is directly hindering your ability to function in the world around you. You may have lost someone dear to your heart, and that can be incredibly crippling, but you must not lose your ability to function in society as well. While grief does not follow a timeline that determines a normal amount of time to heal and a normal diagnosis for depression, it does become problematic when, even a month or two later, your mood is still so poorly impacted that you struggle to interact with those around you. Instead, you find yourself withdrawing and refusing to engage, and that can be incredibly problematic. If you find that your grief seems to be changing into something all consuming instead of something that is meant to be part of your healing process from a point of negativity into positivity, it is time to speak to a professional. Help is out there if you are willing and ready to reach out a hand. Remember, even if you are suffering from depression, it can and will get better. There are plenty of treatment options for people suffering from depression, from medical to therapeutic, to even making lifestyle changes. If you work closely in tandem with a doctor or other medical professional that is familiar with you and your case, you will find that you are able to get the relief that you need from your depression. It may take you time to develop, such as waiting for the medication to build up enough to help, or to make sure that you actively have enough therapeutic skills to actually make use of, but you will see improvements in your life, little by little. Types of Depression Depression is not a one size fits all diagnosis. In fact, there are several different depressive disorders that exist, and understanding the different ones is critical to recognize what is going on in your life and ensuring that you are able to treat yourself. In particular, let’s take a look at unipolar major depression, dysthymia, and postpartum depression to get a better understanding of how depression can and does present, and what can be expected from it. Unipolar Ms ostpartum y nipolar Major pysthivinia Postpar tum Depression Souci! Depression e Defined by e Persistent (at e Happens after major episodes of least 2 years) childbirth deep depression e Mild, but nearly ə Believedto be and a lack of constant you relatedta energy or suffer from fluctuation of motivation depressive hormones * Can be symptoms more intermittent or oft enthan not constant Unipolar Major Depression This is the form of depression that most people think of—it is the depression that is heavy and overreaching, clouding over everything in your life. It may last for a shorter period of time, such as a few weeks to months, or it can happen intermittently in life. You may have periods of calm, during which you do not have very many symptoms, but you will also commonly find that you run into having several symptoms all at once, making it major. Dysthymia Dysthymia refers to mild, persistent depression that lasts for years. It is always overshadowing your life but generally presents itself in manners that are far less harmful than unipolar major depression. Still problematic for sure, it is not something that you should overlook, but generally, it is considered less severe. When you live life with dysthymia, you are chronically mildly depressed. Anything that you do or say will constantly be shadowed over by your depression, and while you may not be majorly depressed or suicidal on the regular, you are likely to still feel quite down on yourself, low on energy, and unwilling to get moving on a regular basis. Postpartum Depression Believed to be brought on due to the influx of hormones that women go through right after giving birth, postpartum depression is incredibly common. In fact, it has become a regular part of screening at women’s postpartum exams precisely because people tend to develop it and it is easier to ensure that you are screening everyone early on rather than waiting to see how other people report their feelings. Unfortunately for the women that suffer from PPD, what should be the best time of their lives, welcoming their newest bundle of joy, becomes overshadowed with low emotions, sadness, inadequacy, and feelings of hopelessness that can be overwhelming. Postpartum depression is commonly treated with medication and therapy during the postpartum period, but this form of depression usually goes away before the infant born during this birth leaves infancy. Depression and CBT Depression is commonly treated with CBT. Because much of depression does exhibit itself in a behavioral manner, it is quite possible to effectively create good habits that can and will motivate an individual into successful functioning. While this will not eliminate the negative feelings per se, it can act as a way to bridge the gap, allowing the individual to begin acting in a better adjusted manner. Through behavioral activation, new habits can be developed and learned. These get the individual back into a routine, and with the development and enforcement of the routines, it becomes clear that the habituating to action once more can really help allow for that initial push over the lack of motivation. That is critical in ensuring the actual activation of new habits. Depression is also commonly coped with in figuring out if there are any negative thoughts that are holding the individual down. It is possible for someone with depression to think about himself in manners that are incredibly negative. This, of course, does nothing to help the individual do any better. It is incredibly difficult to feel good about yourself if you are actively telling yourself that you are a terrible, worthless person and then acting upon those thoughts, and for that reason, CBT seeks to identify and defeat any of those negative thoughts before they can truly corrupt the individual’s mind. In correcting these mindsets, it is possible that the individual can start to see some improvement in their own mentality as they progress through CBT. They can develop more and more skills that enable the individual to cope better with issues that arise. They can help the individual begin to reacquaint himself with these actions that are critical to success. If you feel like you are suffering from depression, one of the best things that you can do for yourself is make an appointment with your primary care physician to identify whether you may actually be suffering from the impacts of depression. If you are, there are ways that you can begin to help yourself, and doing so will help bring joy to your life once more. Chapter 10: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques to Eliminate Depression With that said, it is time to address three of the most common cognitive behavioral therapy techniques that you can use in order to directly begin to alleviate your symptoms of depression. Please remember, if you are currently taking any medication for depression, do not stop suddenly and do not change the regimen of your medication until you have spoken to your doctor about your proposed changes. Changing medication can be incredibly finicky, especially if you have already discovered several methods that are working for you, and you deciding to change that routine that you already have can to more harm than good. Nevertheless, within this chapter, we will address three techniques that are used in treating depression within cognitive behavioral therapy. We are specifically addressing successive approximation, goal setting, and activity scheduling. Remember, while many aspects of CBT focus on changing thought processes, what is often the most effective for those suffering from depression is to use techniques that specifically target behaviors. If you can directly challenge those behaviors, you can begin to better cope with the situations at hand. You can essentially take advantage of the fact that people are creatures of habit and that your body will naturally want to shift into a series of habits that you are actively making use of. Successive Approximation The first method that will be discussed is known as a successive approximation. It is quite similar to the act of exposure therapy. However, the primary difference is that instead of being designed to create tolerance of a specific stimulus you are trying to create and trigger specific behaviors in someone else. You effectively want to make sure that you are building up to a certain behavior while also rewarding yourself for the successes that you do have. Effectively, this will involve you starting out with a goal. With that goal in mind, you break it up into several manageable steps. For example, say that you want to be able to run 3 miles without feeling like you are dying. You may start with a goal of running % a mile without stopping. You work on this, and every time that you succeed, you give yourself a treat. That treat should be something that is incredibly motivating for you—perhaps you promise yourself that if you can run the mile, you can spend some time actively playing on some video games that you have and that if you get to the 3 mile goal, you will buy that new game that is coming out soon. That week, every time you run % mile, you reward yourself. Eventually, you will find that your body is adjusting. Running that % mile no longer seems so intimidating or impossible, and that is when you know that you are moving your goalpost further toward your goal. Now, you must run 34 mile before you are willing to give in to your reward. Eventually, that becomes easier as well, and you will continue to shift your goal until you finally do achieve the 3 mile limit that you have set for yourself. Upon arriving at that 3 mile goal, you reward yourself with that game. The entire purpose behind successive approximation is to get yourself moving in the right direction. This is like rewarding your new puppy when she approaches her new leash on the floor when you are trying to accustom her to it, and you slowly move the milestone until she is happily prancing about next to you on the leash. Yes, this means that you are effectively training yourself into obedience—but if it is good enough for most animals, why not for humans as well? Besides, it cannot be that bad if you are actively training yourself. You are simply relying on several of the tactics that are commonly recognized by the behaviorist perspective in psychology and that is not necessarily wrong or problematic—you are making sure that you are bettering yourself. Goal Setting When you are able to set good goals, you may find that your goals suddenly become a whole lot more attainable. Setting goals, then, is not as simple as just saying that you are going to do something and then making it a point to do so. For example, you cannot say that you are simply going to get a job paying $100,000 a year without ever coming up with a goal that spells out exactly how you would achieve that in the first place. It is imperative that you are able to figure out exactly why and how you will do something beyond just stating that you will do something; otherwise, it becomes incredibly difficult to actually find the motivation to stick to your guns and follow through. Perhaps one of the easiest ways to set goals that are actionable and can be achieved is the use of SMART goals. Standing for Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Timed, these are goals that are specifically designed in a way that takes out the vast majority of your planning. After all, little can be as intimidating as having to come up with a solid action plan when you are trying to achieve something. Having a plan that you feel is not quite secure or proper is not always the most motivating way to set your goal, and for that reason, we will take a look at SMART goals. When you set a SMART goal, you are looking to set a goal that meets each and every one of the checkboxes next to specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and timely. This means that you may need to put a bit of thought into how you will achieve your goal, but if you play your cards right, you can do so in a way that is beneficial to everyone involved. Specific goals are exactly what they sound like—goals with a well defined purpose. You know exactly what you are doing when you set a goal to be specific. For example, imagine that you are actively trying to run more often. You may say, “I want to run,” as your goal, but is that very specific? It does not tell you much more about your goal other than you simply want to make sure that you are running at some point. However, it does not tell you much about ever actually achieving that goal of running. When you make it more specific, though, you say, “I want to be able to run 3 miles straight without stopping.” Now, you have an ending point—you know where your goal wraps up and you know that you should be able to make it happen. Measurable goals are goals that have some defined ending. They usually exist in some manner that you can measure to check your progress. In this instance, your goal of running three miles already included a measurable aspect—you have set it up in the distance that you would like to run. Sometimes, however, it is not quite so clear cut. If you want to stop being angry, for example, you may need to set a goal so you are eliminating a certain portion of blowouts per day or some other way to shift your goal from something relatively vague into something measured. However, by and large, you will find that most of your goals will become measured by the nature of setting the goal in the first place. Achievable goals are goals that are actually possible for you to achieve. It does not matter so much here whether you want to achieve the goal but rather looking at your own capabilities. Do you want to climb Mt. Everest? Do all of your body parts work properly? If you have a problem with an ankle or your back, for example, you may want to overlook the idea of going on that trip to climb the mountain because it is not actually as achievable as you may like. Relevant goals are goals that you actually care about. These goals are the ones that truly matter to you for some reason. A common way to check whether your goal is relevant or not is through asking yourself if you actually want to achieve whatever it is that you are setting out to do. If you are entirely uninterested in the goal, then it is likely not very relevant to you. For example, if you already run 6 miles a morning, running a 3 mile morning does not seem like a stretch or an accomplishment—all because they are in her norm. Timed goals are goals that have an end somewhere. They have some sort of cut off that determines whether or not you were actually successful in achieving your goal. For example, you may give yourself two months of practice to be able to run that three mile track, and if you do not do it by that two month mark, then you forfeit the challenge and prove that you cannot do it. When you have reached the end of the timeline that you have set out to achieve, you need to be able to determine whether or not you were actually successful. In following these steps, you will find that your goals are actually far more reachable. It becomes far easier to actually achieve your goals when you know how to structure them for success. Effectively, then, you are setting up so you know that you are able to approach a situation in a manner that enables you to be far more successful in your life. It may be a pain to work on your goals initially, but you will find that doing so is imperative to your ability to actively work on what you are trying to work on. Activity Scheduling Finally, activity scheduling refers to the art of intentionally scheduling activities throughout your day to do. You may, for example, decide to continue working on being able to run those three miles. In this case, you would actively schedule in time to work on your running at the regiment that you have set up for yourself. You will effectively be doing your best to schedule those activities in and meet them. When you do meet your activities that are scheduled for the day, you will then be able to use any of the extra time that was not used up to achieve your goal for the day to do something that you enjoy. This method is quite similar to the method of successive approximation, but in this case, you are rewarding your progress toward achieving a goal. You are ensuring that other people are likely to want to follow your lead because, as you begin to use this, you find that being organized is actually far easier than you may think it will be otherwise. To do this, all you must do is come up with some sort of schedule and follow it. If you can do so, you are pushing yourself to develop good time management skills, and that will also help you bolster your own emotional intelligence as well. Chapter 11: Insomnia Despite the fact that children everywhere hate the idea of sleep and reject the idea of taking naps whenever the option is presented, adults all around the world wish they could go back to those days where sleep was not a limited commodity. With how busy the world is, how several aspects of life are now 24/7, and how much work gets crammed into such short periods of time, people everywhere find that they are not getting enough sleep. However, what about the people who, despite how much they may wish to sleep, cannot manage to do so? These people may desperately want to fall asleep, spending plenty of time in their beds as they toss and turn, wishing for sleep to take over, but it never comes. These people suffer from insomnia. No one ever wants to be on the receiving end of insomnia, but when it strikes, it can be incredibly frustrating. When you are desperate to be able to get a few extra hours of sleep, lying in bed without any luck can be one of the greatest slights of the universe. What is Insomnia? Insomnia is a sleep disorder—this means that it is characterized primarily by disordered sleep patterns that cause significant issues to the individual suffering from it. When you suffer from insomnia, you may either struggle to fall asleep, or you may struggle to stay asleep. This means that either way, you are missing out on incredibly valuable sleep. After all, the average adult needs at least 8 hours of sleep a night to remain functional. When you do not get that sleep, you run the risk of all sorts of health issues, as well as the risk of falling asleep intermittently throughout the day. In fact, you may even fall asleep at the wheel in your car, which can be incredibly dangerous, not only for you but for everyone around you as well. When you fall asleep at the wheel, you can cause fatal car accidents for everyone involved. Ultimately, insomnia can be summed up as four symptoms, with at least one needing to be present in order to warrant a diagnosis of insomnia. These symptoms are struggling to fall asleep, struggling to stay asleep at night, waking up too early, or feeling tired, even after sleeping. With these symptoms, you will find that you are constantly exhausted and dragging, and no matter how hard you try, you struggle to function. People are not designed to function without sleep—in fact, losing even just four hours of sleep in a night can have the same impact on you as having a beer before driving. You need to be getting proper sleep if you want to be properly functional, but for those with insomnia, that is an impossibility. Forms of Insomnia Ultimately, there are two distinct forms of insomnia—primary and secondary. These are determined quite simply. Primary insomnia refers to people that are struggling to sleep without any associated physical cause. Effectively, nothing physical seems to point toward the reason for the lack of sleep. Secondary insomnia, on the other hand, is typically caused by something else. It can be caused by physical ailments, such as a physical issue like cancer or arthritis making it impossible to sleep. The difference between the two is primarily whether insomnia is the problem or a symptom of a larger problem. When insomnia is the problem, insomnia itself can be treated. However, when the insomnia is a symptom of another problem, sometimes the best course of action is to treat the symptom. Insomnia can further be classified into either acute or chronic insomnia based upon how long it has lasted. When you are suffering from acute insomnia, you have had it short term. Effectively, it lasts for anywhere from one night to a couple of weeks. However, it quickly becomes chronic, or long lasting, when it is recurring for at least half of the week for longer than a month. Causes of Insomnia In understanding the causes of insomnia, you can begin to understand how best to treat it. If there is an environmental cause of insomnia, for example, you can treat the environment to best figure out how to fix the problem. If the problem is behavioral, you can change those. If the problem is due to medication, those can be changed as well. Effectively, there is usually some sort of cause to the insomnia that people feel—it is simply a matter of figuring out what that cause is so it can be addressed somehow. Acute insomnia is usually caused by something short term and environmental. For example, a significant stressor can cause insomnia—a trauma, a loss, moving, or anything else that drastically uproots your entire life can then lead to insomnia. The discomfort of being sick can also lead to short term insomnia, especially if you are suffering from being unable to breathe and struggling to avoid hacking out a lung. Other times, physical discomfort can make it impossible to sleep—perhaps you are in bed with your two toddlers and they have you jammed against the wall with your neck bent funny so you cannot possibly get comfortable enough to fall asleep. The environment can also directly impact your ability to sleep in the short term—if your neighbors are loud or your power is out so your heater is off and it is cold, you may struggle to fall asleep. Much more harmlessly, you can also see insomnia as a direct result of jet lag—just getting home from a trip to the other side of the world can cause you to suffer from insomnia. Chronic insomnia, on the other hand, is typically linked to more persistent causes. You may be suffering from chronic stress that keeps you up at night —perhaps you cannot quite make ends meet, or you are getting through a cancer diagnosis. Maybe you are depressed or anxious and find that you cannot quiet your mind enough to fall asleep. When these occur, treating the insomnia becomes a bit more difficult—you must be able to alleviate the suffering in some way. If you are stressed, you need to figure out a way to manage it. If you are in pain, you should find a way to manage that as well. Treating Insomnia Despite how tempting it may be to reach for that bottle of wine or beer before bed to help you relax enough to sleep through your insomnia, this is ill advised—firstly, treating yourself with drugs is never healthy. Secondly, all this will do is worsen the quality of the sleep that you do get. Even if you are desperate to get some much needed sleep, you are far better off looking at other methods to get it, such as figuring out how to meet with a doctor to see if you need a prescription. Generally, unless your insomnia is becoming so problematic that you are starting to struggle to function, you are better off trying to figure out how to use good sleep hygiene to help yourself get that sleep. However, if you are finding that your functioning has been impaired, you may find that you are best served by taking some temporary sleeping pills that can help you fall asleep quickly. This is generally the advice for acute insomnia. For chronic insomnia, you must first figure out what the underlying causes are. It is always possible that there is some physical reason for that insomnia to be so problematic, and if it is found to not be a physical cause, you may be referred to behavioral therapy. Insomnia and CBT In particular, CBT can be incredibly effective at teaching exercises that will aid in the falling asleep of those who otherwise would struggle. There are several techniques that can impact the behavioral side of your mind in order to trigger you to finally be able to begin falling asleep regularly again. If you have always wanted to get back into that ability to sleep again, speaking to your therapist would be a fantastic starting point. Within the next chapter as well, we will look at three different techniques common in CBT that will help treat insomnia. These teach behaviors that are designed to promote better sleep hygiene and help you fall asleep. Chapter 12: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques to Eliminate Insomnia While sleep aids are always an option for those suffering from insomnia, many people prefer to avoid them. They may dislike the impact of the medication that they take, disliking that they feel groggy when they wake up, or they may find that they end up doing things that they regret the next morning, such as going on an online shopping spree for random items that they do not actually want nor need. When this happens, the individual can be quite stressed out and embarrassed—what if they spent money that they need to have refunded? What if they sent messages to other people that shouldn’t have been sent? If you feel like you would like to sleep better and more soundly but without the impact of sleep aids, there are options for you. You can instead learn how to eliminate insomnia with behavioral therapy training that can really aid you in figuring out how best to address your situation. You can learn how to be cognizant of how to get to sleep while also focusing on doing so without having to make any major dietary or medical changes to your life. In particular, this chapter seeks to introduce you to three techniques common in CBT that can help you eliminate the impact of insomnia in your life. First, you will learn about stimulus control. Then, you will take a look at sleep restriction, and finally, you will learn a relaxation training method to help you relax into sleep when you feel like you otherwise will not be able to fall asleep. With the help of these techniques, you should find that falling asleep begins to come easier than ever, allowing you to once and for all settle back into your comfortable routine and enjoy those good nights’ sleep that you have missed out on for so long. Stimulus Control When you look at the world through the behaviorist’s eyes, you are seeing things through the belief that everything that you are exposed to directly impacts what you are doing at any given point of time. Effectively, your own behaviors are constantly just reflections of your surroundings. When you are able to recognize this, you will see just how important controlling your surroundings can be to sleep. When you are struggling to sleep, the first place to check is often your sleep hygiene. What are you doing before bed? Are you using a regular schedule? Are you using caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol before going to sleep? Are you eating food that can lead to indigestion? Is your bedroom simply not conducive to sleep? When you seek to use stimulus control, you are effectively becoming incredibly strict with what you are willing to expose yourself to in the last half of the day. You may refuse to drink soda or have any sugar or caffeine after 2pm in hopes of everything that you had consumed being out of your system by the time that you are ready to sleep. You may make it a point to exercise during the day in order to help your nighttime sleep. The most effective form of stimulus control of all, however, is developing a proper sleep routine and making sure that you have a comfortable sleep environment that is designed to be conducive to sleep. In order to do this, you must first be willing to cut out all caffeine, spicy food, and blue light in the last half of the evening. Blue light comes from your screens, such as your cell phone, tablet computer, or even your television—the light can prevent you from being able to fall asleep because it directly interferes with your own body’s mechanics that are designed to help you wind down to sleep. You must make it a point to cut off all blue light at least one hour before bed and set a rule that no screens will be used in the bedroom. During that hour before bed, make sure you expose yourself to stimuli that will be relaxing. You will effectively condition yourself to fall asleep by teaching your body that those are the predecessors to bedtime, so when you begin that bedtime routine, your body will begin to produce the right hormones to help you fall asleep. You may decide to take a warm shower, read a book, and then settle down in bed in the dark, free of screens, while also making sure that your room is cool and comfortable. If you are willing to restrict the stimuli that you expose yourself to, you will find that sweet sleep coming in no time. It may take a few times to get your body on the same page, but as soon as it is, you will not be able to deny the difference—just being able to fall asleep will be a huge improvement. Sleep Restriction Sometimes, what you need to do in order to help yourself get back on schedule is what is called sleep restriction. This is exactly what it sounds like—you will restrict your ability to sleep during certain times to effectively teach yourself to sleep at night when you should be. This can be particularly draining and difficult, however, because you will have to be making it a point to staying awake even when the need to sleep threatens to overwhelm you because you need to stay awake until it is your proper bedtime. When you begin sleep restriction, you will start by limiting your time in bed to only the hours that you are currently asleep, making sure to log your sleep patterns. You are allowed to spend only those sleeping hours in bed at first. If you are only sleeping 3 or 4 hours a night, then you are only allowed to spend time in your bed during those 3 or 4 hours. From there, you must set a wake time and bedtime based upon your current sleep time. If you are only averaging 5 hours of sleep in bed and you determine that you must be awake by 6am every day, this means that you go to bed every night at lam. No matter how much sleep you have gotten, you must always get up at 6am for the next several weeks, while also going to bed at the same time. Even if you feel tired before 1am, you must stay awake until then for the training to work. You will then follow this schedule for at least two weeks. After the two weeks, you can start getting in bed 15 minutes earlier on a nightly basis until you are comfortable with how much sleep you are getting. Over time, you will find that you will either figure out how much sleep you need to get and find a nice equilibrium point between how much sleep and when you get that sleep. Relaxation Training Finally, sometimes, you cannot fall asleep no matter what you try. Within CBT, there is thankfully a type of training that you can use in order to begin relaxing in order to fall asleep. This is known as relaxation training. You will effectively be triggering to the brain that it is time to relax based upon the cues that you are sending. In manually making it a point to relax your own body, little by little, you will eventually trigger your body to also want to relax on its own and fall asleep. This will effectively override any feelings of danger that are keeping the brain on overdrive and potentially preventing you from being able to fall asleep. To begin, you will want to get yourself comfortable in bed. Make sure that you have spent an adequate amount of time following your sleep routine and making sure that you have prepared accordingly. As you get into bed, make sure that your room is dark, quiet, and suitable for sleep. Find your comfortable spot and take in a deep breath as you do so. Feel the breath travel through your lungs and fill your body with life giving oxygen. Exhale and then focus on the top of your head. Do you feel any tension? If your scalp feels tense, try to release it. If not, slowly scan down your body starting from the top. Anywhere that you find tenseness, you must manually encourage relaxation. Perhaps you find that your jaw is clenched because you are stressed. With a deep inhale, relax the jaw and allow yourself to settle down deeper into the mattress. Keep scanning your body. Every place that you notice tension, gently release it, allowing each part of your body to relax, little by little. As you work your way through your body, calming anywhere with tension, you will feel the progress. You will feel the sensation of relaxation within you. Continue to release the tension all the way down to your toes, and when it is all gone, remain motionless in bed. While you lay there, focus on your breathing. Take in a deep breath for four seconds. Hold it for a moment in your lungs before slowly exhaling as well, allowing yourself to release the air from your chest and begin to relax. Continue this process while focusing entirely on your breathing. Any time that you notice tension building again, release it and continue. You want to be as relaxed as possible. If your room is conducive to sleep, you should find that you fall asleep soon. Chapter 13: Anger Everyone feels angry from time to time. It is a normal human emotion with a very good purpose—it seeks to defend us. However, anger is also perhaps one of the most destructive emotions that people can have. It is entirely possible for people who are angry to fly into a blind rage, utterly losing control of themselves and behaving in ways that are incredibly dangerous. People have been known to eve kill during these periods of time, so incredibly blinded by their all consuming rage that they did not realize what they were doing until it was too late. Ultimately, anger is useful in moderation. If it is not in moderation, it typically errs on the side of destructive and problematic, and for that reason learning to cope and control your anger is one of the best skills that you can learn if you hope to be a positive influence that is capable of interacting with other people, no matter what the capacity. Within this chapter, we will address anger as an emotion—we will look at its purpose and why it is commonly triggered. We will also take the time to understand what happens when anger becomes problematic and the signs that you or someone you know may have an anger management problem. What is Anger? Nearly everyone feels anger at some point—that boiling, white hot fire in the chest and the sudden need to fight back. Anger itself is one of the primary emotions that humans have—it is an emotion that is rooted entirely in protection. When you are angry, you are going to behave aggressively, and for a good reason. Do you remember the discussion of emotions as motivators for various functions to aid in survival? Anger is one such emotion, and it is one of the most powerful of them all. Anger is primarily defined as feeling negatively toward someone or something that you have perceived has wronged you in some way. It is essentially your way to protect and enforce your own boundaries to ensure that people do not take advantage of you. In moderation, it does exactly that —it can be a proper alarm bell to key you in to the fact that you are being taken advantage of or otherwise used. You will be able to tell that something is not quite right if it brings you to anger without you having to do a thing. You simply feel infuriated. If you do not know what the problem is, it is time to do some close introspection to figure out what is going on. As a primary emotion to help ensure survival, your anger is critical to protecting you in certain situations. In fact, you are likely to be angry if you feel like your needs are not being met in some way. If you are hungry, you are more likely to snap, or if you feel like you are threatened, you may feel that inclination to snap at other people. Ultimately, however, every person deals with anger in a different manner. Some people are incredibly patient to a fault—no matter what happens to them, they are able to remain calm and level headed. In particular, this is a skill set that is strongly valued in emotional intelligence—the ability to self regulate is critical if you want to be able to manage yourself and other people, after all. Other people, on the other hand, find themselves enslaved by their anger, always giving in to whatever impulses they have. This can be incredibly problematic, as we will discuss shortly. Anger and Motivation Anger is a form of motivation—it motivates us to protect. Effectively, when you are angry, you recognize that there is something threatening about your situation and you seek to fight it. You know that you are facing some sort of injustice or threat—perhaps someone took advantage of you and ran away with your belongings. Maybe you were trusting your best friend to help you with something, only for your friend to cancel on you again. You feel like you are betrayed, and that sense of betrayal leads to anger. Anger is effectively your fight response—if you feel the impulses of anger, it is usually because you are angry at someone or something and you are trying to figure out who or why. Your anger, when it is expressed, is usually in body language. When you are angry, you will look the part—you will stare threateningly and you will not likely back down if challenged. Effectively, you are preparing for a fight and you expect the other person that is threatening you to as well. While anger may have initially been a basic instinct to help protect oneself and family, it has become more. We are no longer threatened on the regular with a need to fight to the death, but the feeling of anger when we are feeling betrayed is just as strong as ever. When you are prone to anger, you may find that you have several common triggers that you cannot escape. Even if you know that your anger or frustration is illogical or unwarranted, you cannot help but feel angry. Some of these causes can range from feeling grief and sadness after losing someone to feeling like someone around you has done something that is less than respectful. Of course, anger can also arise due to stress, a lack of control, or even unmet physical needs. Needs like the need for food, sex, or water can lead to anger and short tempers within people, leading to them being far more likely to lash out at other than they otherwise would be. It is important to recognize that people can feel angry for a wide range of reasons, and if you find that you have angered someone, it may be worth the effort to figure out where the communication disconnect is. If you cannot identify the disconnect, you may need to instead focus on how best to step back from the situation until the other party can calm down. Especially if you or the other person is known to have an anger problem, it may be smart to engage in all conversations when everyone’s anger has subsided. When Anger Becomes Problematic Ultimately, like with most areas in life, anger becomes a problem when you are no longer able to control it. If you find that your anger causes you to say or do things that you regret, you may find that you have an anger problem. Unfortunately, uncontrolled anger s surprisingly common, and it is also surprisingly unhealthy, both physically and emotionally. When you are angry, your body automatically gears up for a fight due to the fact that anger is the primary emotion behind the fight response. This means that your breathing increases, your sensation of pain goes down, and your heart rate and blood pressure skyrocket. You effectively prepare to fight to the death, even though what you may be upset about is actually completely trivial at best. You may be getting all worked up over a joke, for example, or the fact that someone else got to the parking spot you had been eyeing while waiting for a woman and her children to cross the road. Ultimately, if you want to determine if you have anger issues yourself, you may want to focus on some serious self reflection with the following questions to consider in mind: e Do you often feel like you are angry? e Is your anger often out of control, despite your best attempts to manage it? e Do you think that your anger is hurting your relationships with other people? e Do you find that your anger causes you to hurt other people? e Do you regret what you do when you are angry once you calm down? e Do you have a tendency to hurt other people, physically or emotionally, when you are angry? Answering yes to any of those questions can be incredibly telling that there is, in fact, some sort of anger issue going on in your life. As devastating of a realization as that may be, it also means that you can figure out how best to address the world around you from then on. If you know that you struggle with your anger, you can begin to treat it and work on techniques that you can use to help eliminate that struggle. Chapter 14: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques to Eliminate Anger Issues Once you have identified that you may be struggling with your anger, it is time for you to begin understanding what comes next. In particular, you may be wondering how best you can cope with those feelings of anger as they arise? What can you possibly do to help the situation around you? How can you prevent your anger from getting worse when you do feel it? Because oftentimes, when people are angry, they are not thinking clearly, it becomes critical to figure out how best to address the situation when you are calm. If you can put together a plan to help you manage your anger when you are calm, you will often find that following that plan gets infinitely easier when you are in a situation that calls for it. In particular, this chapter will introduce you to three methods common in CBT to helping manage anger issues that may arise. Remember that ultimately, the method that you use to control your anger is your own—all you need to do is find the one that works best for you. The best anger management is the anger management that does its job well. Also, remember that just because you still feel angry sometimes even with the implementation of these tools does not mean that they are not working. Keep in mind that anger is a very real, very normal emotion and you should consider the fact that it is normal for people to feel. You do not need to be ashamed of feeling anger—what matters is that you know how best to control it to avoid running into any issues later. the three techniques that you will be addressing within this chapter are anger disruption, cognitive change, and an attitude change with an emphasis on forgiveness and acceptance over the situation at hand. Anger Disruption When you are angry, you usually struggle to recognize it in the moment. Sure, you may be aware of the sensation, but you are rarely cognitively able to remind yourself, “Hey, I’m feeling angry—lI better not do that right now!” Instead, you find yourself swayed by the need to continue with the yelling and the demanding despite knowing that it is not the best possible way to move forward. If this sounds like you, you are not alone. This is why many people take advantage of anger disruption. Anger disruption is the ability to effectively interrupt your anger in some way, shape, or form. Usually, this is done by removing yourself from the situation and avoiding the stimulus that is frustrating to you at that moment. Some people may call this running away, but keep in mind that choosing to temporarily remove yourself in order to calm down is not cowardly or running away—it is choosing to avoid escalation. It can be good to discuss this technique with those that you are close to beforehand so they know what you are doing in the heat of the moment. After all, if you are angry, it is quite likely that they are also frustrated to some degree and they may want their own sort of resolution to the situation. There are several different ways that you can manage this technique. For example, you can avoid the distressing stimulus altogether. If you are fighting with your spouse, walk into another room and pick up something else to do. Perhaps you choose to fold some laundry or do the dishes—you chose something neutral to do while you wait for the feeling to pass. You may also have an internal method to remove yourself emotionally from the situation, such as telling yourself that you will always take a deep breath and count to ten before responding when you are angry. Yes, this may draw out some conversations, but it will allow you to weigh your options and what you are saying well before you say it. Keep in mind that while removal is a great way to manage your emotions in the moment, it does nothing to fix the problem or help you gain more self control over yourself in the future. You may still be just as readily angered as you have not done any work on what has been angering you at that point in time. This is very rarely a strategy that can be used alone—it must be used in tandem with other aspects, such as cognitive restructuring in order to come up with some sort of method of addressing those negative feelings that you have. In addressing those negative feelings, you may find that you are actually able to protect yourself further. Cognitive Change Sometimes, the best thing that you can do when you are angry is find a way to manage and shift your mindset away from anger and onto something that is far more productive and useful to you. For example, if you are angry, you are going to be so caught up on what is and is not fair that you are not likely to think very clearly when you are being walked through why you did not get the result you were looking for on something. Maybe you are angry because the store was sold out of the specific item you wanted after you Saw someone else walking away with that particular item that you had set out to buy. When you get upset by a situation like this, it can be incredibly easy to find yourself caught up in the fact that things went wrong. Instead of seeing that you were simply unlucky, you somehow turn it into some sort of grievous insult against you—you were intentionally left out of getting that item and that it must have been your bad luck again. You may even go so far as to insult the person who bought the last of the item because you are being driven by your anger and feel the need to scream and yell your frustrations. Your mind is caught in the loop of negativity, and you need to figure out how to best push your mind out of that angry, negative perspective toward a perspective that is far more rational and calmer. One such way to change your cognitive state is to use silly humor in some way. You may not laugh initially, as no one enjoys laughing at themselves or making themselves feel dumb or silly. However, this type of cognitive change seeks to make the situation humorous in some way, shape, or form in order to sort of shock the mind out of that angry state of mind and into one that will be able to handle the situation better. For example, imagine that you are frustrated over not getting that last item at the store. Under your breath, you mutter that the person is a selfish pig as you walk away in frustration. The other person must have heard you because she turns around shrugs, and says that her name is, in fact, Portia, which means pig, and she is quite happy to keep her item, thank you very much. The absurdity of the situation gives you pause as you realize the irony of it, and the sudden shock is enough to help you shift from that moment of toxic anger into one that is mildly amused by the way the universe played that situation out. In the end, you apologize for calling the lady a pig and go on your way. Acceptance and Forgiveness Finally, let’s talk about both acceptance and forgiveness. Stop and think for a moment about what it is that makes people angry. Usually, either it is some sort of inconvenience, or it is because they are causing some sort of problem for you some other way. When you learn to accept the situation for what it is and move on, however, you may find that the anger melts away almost effortlessly. For example, imagine that your child ran through the family room with a glass of milk, something that is against the rules of your home, and spilled milk all over the carpet and sofa. However, instead of telling anyone, he snuck away and pretended like it never happened—until the smell of rotting milk was a dead giveaway. You may immediately feel angry—you now have yet another mess that you have to clean up that you would much rather not deal with. You are frustrated at your child for not listening and wishing that they would have listened to you all along, or at the very least, that they would not have hidden what they were doing from you. They could have asked for help to clean up the mess before it had a chance to fester. One way that you can stop that anger, however, is to stop, remind yourself that it was not intentional, and move on. You are basically accepting what has happened for what it is—an unintentional accident that was handled poorly and moving on. You are effectively moving away from the idea that your child had intentionally ignored your rules or dumped the milk to spite you, which you may have initially felt. Instead, you focus on the accident and move on. When you do this, you effectively put an emphasis on understanding the other person’s perspective. They may have done something that triggered your anger, but why did they do what they did? If you are able to stop and consider things from their perspectives instead of from your own, you may find that you are actually far more likely to accept and put up with it. You are more capable of moving forward simply because you are able to recognize the other side and show some compassion that you may hope would be shown to you if you had made a mistake as well. When you use acceptance and forgiveness, then you simply let go of those feelings of anger and frustration. You know that what has happened has happened and effectively let go of the temptation to dwell on the past. Chapter 15: Social Skills Finally, we have arrived at the last chapter of the book! Within this chapter, it is time to address several social skills that people have. As both CBT and emotional intelligence seek to help you become a well rounded individual that is capable of handling nearly anything, it is important to stop and recognize the importance of some of the most basic social skills that you may need. When you master these social skills of mirroring, empathizing, making good eye contact, listening actively, and learning to analyze other people, you will find that your own abilities to be emotionally intelligent will increase dramatically. Effectively, you will be able to manage yourself and those around you. Imagine how much easier communicating with other people would be if you could understand their body language or if you acknowledged their own feelings at the moment? How much easier would it be to relate to people if you knew what to look for to know that they are interested in you? What if you are able to listen actively in order to better understand those around you? Mirroring The first technique that we will look at was drawn from neuro linguistic programming but has become incredibly popular. This is the skill of mirroring—when you can mirror someone else, you are effectively able to make sure that you and the other person have a working connection with each other. Commonly used to make yourself more relatable or more persuasive, using mirroring allows you to actively relate to the other person through tapping into the other person’s unconscious mind in order to convince them to be willing to interact with you. When you are mirroring someone else, you are acting upon the idea that the closer two people are to each other, the more in tune they are with each other. They typically mimic each other’s movements without even realizing it—they will actively follow the lead of each other in their conversations and even in their body language. If one crosses their arms, so will the other. If one takes a drink, the other one will, too. Effectively, then, you can tell how close people are in general by looking at how similarly and in sync they move. However, you can also trigger this in other people—you can effectively convince them to follow your lead in order to reap all of the benefits of them actively feeling like they can trust you. Think of when this could be useful—particularly if you want to be persuasive with emotional intelligence, you need to be able to prove that you are trustworthy. This is one such way to do so. To mirror other people, you will follow three key steps—you will make sure that you feel some sort of connection to the other person, you will match their pace somehow, and then you will identify their punctuator. In learning these, you will be able to convince even strangers that you hardly know that you and they are closer than either of you actually are. This is an incredibly important social skill—you can use it to facilitate a relationship that you feel is not properly developing quickly enough, for example. Make a Match the connection pace When you go to make a connection, you effectively want to figure out how best to present yourself in the situation to make yourself seem like you are actively listening. Of course, you will be actively listening, but you really want to emphasize it for the other person. You do this by facing the other person, making solid eye contact, and nodding your head as you listen. As you do this, you should feel the makings of the beginning of a relationship. You can continue through matching the pace of the other person—you effectively want to pick up on the other person’s enthusiasm and speech patterns. If they are speaking rapidly, you, too, should speak rapidly. If they are calm, you should approach the situation calmly as well. In doing this for a while, you should find that they also are matching your own speaking pace as well. Finally, you must figure out what the other party’s punctuator is—this is how they really emphasize what they are saying at any given moment. Most commonly, you see this in people who may punch the air or make a certain hand gesture, such as chopping on their palm when they really want to emphasize that point they are making. Upon identifying it, you must then figure out when they are going to use it next—and then beat them to it. You want to use the punctuator before they do in order to make sure that you actively are able to trigger that mirroring connection. From there, all you need to do is test if you were successful. If you were, you will find that they will unconsciously mirror your own subtle movements as well. Empathizing While empathizing does not come naturally to everyone, it is critical to know how to do it. Many people will find that they naturally empathize with others without trying to, but if you are not in that lucky group that learns to empathize without much effort, you may find that you need to make it a point to learn. Remember, empathy is critical to your own ability to relate to other people. If you cannot naturally empathize, you must figure out how to cognitively empathize so you can, at the very least, understand other people and their emotions as well. When you want to begin, you will start quite simply—imagine yourself in the other person’s shoes. If you are annoyed that your friend is irritated that you were late to something, perhaps you should consider how you would have felt if your friend had been late to meet you—you likely would have been annoyed. While that is a simple version of how to imagine yourself in the shoes of someone else, this is exactly what you will be doing. You are looking at the other person’s situation and trying to figure out how their situation would make you feel. You are going to want to consider as much as you can when you do this—where they grew up, what do they have available to them, and anything about them that is relevant to this situation. Are they annoyed because they feel like you have grown up too sheltered from consequences, perhaps? Or maybe because they feel like you, just like everyone else, do not respect them for some reason. With that idea of how they are feeling, you should then take a moment to investigate any of the underlying feelings that may be guiding the other person. Now that you recognize that your friend is annoyed at you for being late, for example, you are able to ask questions for further understanding to figure out why it mattered in the first place. In developing this understanding of what they feel and why you are able to begin empathizing with the other person. Over time, you may find that this process becomes quite automatic—you no longer have to think about it. That is a good thing and it is a sign that you are naturally becoming more emotionally intelligent. Making Good Eye Contact Making good eye contact with other people is a critical skill. When you can make good, healthy eye contact, you are effectively allowing yourself to acknowledge the other party. You are telling them that they matter to you simply because you are actively looking at them. Making good eye contact is actually surprisingly simple—when you need to make eye contact with someone else, you should follow the rule of making eye contact 50% of the time when you are speaking and 70% of the time when you are listening. This allows the other person to see that you are attentive and interested in them, while also reminding them to continue speaking to you. If you find that making active eye contact is too difficult for any reason at all, you may find that looking at the bridge of their nose fools them too. As far as the other person will be concerned, you will be making eye contact with them, and you are able to avoid it if you find that direct eye contact is uncomfortable or too much for you to manage. However, even the illusion of eye contact can go a long way. Active Listening Another crucial social skill, especially if you wish to be emotionally intelligent, is being able to listen actively. Too many people make the mistake of listening with the intent to reply to what is being said rather than to actively listen to what is being said. When you listen actively, you are effectively ensuring that the speaker feels acknowledged and like you truly care. If you wish to be emotionally intelligent, you are focused on trying to make that a priority. Effectively, then, you will be actively attempting to listen with the intent to understand. Doing so is not as difficult as it may seem. All you need to do is start by making eye contact as the other party speaks. As you listen, you should always be paying your undivided attention to the other party. No distractions should be allowed during this phase. Make sure that you are actively listening and nodding your head to show that you are listening. The most important part, however, is to remember that as you listen, you should be focused on listening only. There should be no attempts to come up with your own responses to the other party—you should simply be making it a point to hear and understand. When the other person finishes speaking, before you reply, you must try to recap what was said. In your own words, offer a brief summary of what you believe was said and then ask to make sure you got it right. If they agree, then you can take the time to figure out your reply. If they inform you that you are wrong, however, you must ask clarifying questions to make sure that you do get a solid understanding. Only after you have that understanding are you able to finally put together your reply to ensure that you have actively listened. Understanding Body Language Finally, one last skill that will not be instructed, but is strongly recommended that you check out is the ability to read and understand body language. Effectively, when you learn how to read the body language of other people, you are enabling yourself to better understand them. You are learning how best to understand those around you when you learn to read their nonverbal communication. If you wish to be emotionally intelligent and are ready to move on to skills beyond what has been included in the book thus far, moving on to analyzing people is probably the best place for you to go. Conclusion Congratulations! You have made it to the end of Emotional Intelligence & Cognitive Behavioral Therapy! At this point, you have taken a look into both emotional intelligence and CBT, two methods of self improvement that are readily actionable without requiring the instruction of a professional. Hopefully, your journey of reading through this book was informative and pleasing for you. Every effort was made to ensure that what you read was something that you could act upon, relate to, and readily understand. Perhaps the most important takeaway from this book, above all, is the fact that thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are intricately related to one another. Remember the fact that your thoughts will always influence your feelings, which will always influence your behaviors, and use that understanding to really push your own social interactions forward. You will not only be able to control yourself better in knowing these cycles, but you will also be able to predict other people’s behaviors as well, allowing you to begin to develop that propensity for relationship management that is so important within emotional intelligence. As you read through this book, you were guided through a solid understanding of what emotional intelligence is. You learned about the purpose of EQ, as well as the pillars that help build it, along with the primary skills within each pillar. From there, you took a look into cognitive behavioral therapy, another process that can help you learn to self regulate, which in turn, makes it valuable to emotional intelligence. From here, you have plenty of options. You may decide that you wish to study more about emotional intelligence and CBT—both are valid options, as this book only scratched the beginning of both deep fields. You may decide that you want to learn more about empathy and how to wield it to become successful in social interactions. You may even decide to take the advice in the last chapter and focus solely on learning about how to read other people. Remember, being able to analyze body language consciously can be one of your biggest assets, especially if you are striving for emotional intelligence and excellence. No matter where you choose to go, however, what holds true is that you now have the skills and several techniques to help you handle many different self regulation problems. There were several techniques that were provided for you to help you work through depression, anxiety, insomnia, and anger. These techniques may be incredibly valuable to you as you begin to practice them. Thank you so much for allowing me to join you on your journey to mental wellness. Whether you suffer from anxiety and depression or whether you have simply been looking for methods through which to better yourself, this book should have provided you with plenty of actionable advice that will aid you in all of your endeavors. No matter where you go from now, remember that the techniques of both emotional intelligence and cognitive behavioral therapy can be incredibly influential and incredibly beneficial to you as a person. As you master these skills, you will find that your own interactions with others will change. Finally, please feel free to leave a review on Amazon if you have found this book to be useful to you. It was designed to provide you with plenty of information in the most understandable way possible, and if you have found it to be useful, do not hesitate to hop on over to the Amazon page and let me know. Your valuable feedback is always greatly appreciated! Thank you and good luck on your journey. Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse Recovery A Guide to Understand Emotional Narcissism, Identify the Narcissist and Escape from Narcissistic Techniques. Use Empathy to Recover from Narcissistic Abuses Introduction Congratulations on purchasing Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse Recovery, and thank you for doing so. Have you ever had that feeling of dread when you look at the clock and realize that someone will be home soon? Maybe it was a parent, or perhaps it was a romantic partner. You know that they are on their way, and you immediately dread it. Instead of being at ease, you find yourself stressed out and on edge. You may find that you dread being around the other person, and any time you know that you will have to see him or her, you cannot help but feel your own anxiety spike, even if you have no reason that you can think of to be so uncomfortable. If you know that feeling of dread that comes when you face seeing someone that you know, you may be suffering from narcissistic or emotional abuse. Now, you may be thinking that the person that you are afraid of has never laid a hand on you, or that you cannot possibly think of a time during which the other person was abusive. However, not all abuse leaves a physical mark. In fact, some of the worst abuse that a person can endure never leaves a physical mark at all. It is possible that you have been suffering from emotional or narcissistic abuse without being aware of it. Your unconscious mind may recognize that what has been happening is not right or normal, causing you to feel afraid or anxious without reason. If you are not aware of the signs, it can be easy to miss them, and you may instead entirely overlook the true cause as being unnecessary anxiety that needs to be medicated or treated in some other way. However, this abuse is very real, and the effects of the abuse hurting other people are real as well. This book is your guide to identifying emotional and narcissistic abuse. You will be able to tell if you are, in fact, suffering from one of these invisible types of abuse, and if you are, you will be given the tools that you will need to handle it. You will be instructed on what to expect in abusive situations, how to recognize them, and how to heal from them, allowing you to reclaim your life once and for all. Remember, no one should feel like they have to live life in fear. Being in your home should not be a source of anxiety, nor should you ever have to feel like you must constantly interact with someone that makes you uncomfortable. When you read through this book, you will discover how to recognize several types of abuse, some of which you may have never realized were abusive in the first place. You will learn how to recognize and recover from emotional abuse. You will then be introduced to recognizing the narcissist—a particularly insidious personality type that usually leads to manipulative, coercive, and abusive treatment of those around them. You will learn how to recognize the narcissistic abuser, as well as the narcissist’s favorite tactics to abuse. You will learn how deeply the narcissist’s abuse can hit, even if you are not ever harmed physically. Finally, you will be introduced to the empath, a personality type that, due to the kind nature and desire to help others, usually ends up taken advantage of by manipulators and abusers everywhere. You will learn about the empath’s greatest strength —empathy, and how that power of empathy can help overcome the abuse that has been faced. As you read through this book, it is with the utmost hope that you will find it to be helpful, instructive, and provide you with an actionable advice that you can follow and use in order to protect yourself from abuse, or if you have already found yourself abused, it will point you in the right direction to healing. Keep in mind that you do not have to suffer through abuse, and if you ever feel like you are in active danger, please consult with your local domestic violence hotline to help you. You may have access to more resources than you realized to help you live the life you deserve: A life free from abuse. There are plenty of books on this subject on the market, thanks again for choosing this one! Every effort was made to ensure it is full of as much useful information as possible; please enjoy it! Chapter 1: Abuse in Relationships When people think of abuse, they typically think of the kind that leaves noticeable evidence behind—physical and sexual abuse. However, abuse comes in all shapes and sizes, with different effects and results. Would you consider being yelled at to shut up abuse? What about being called names while yelling? Throwing something at the wall? Punching a door? Not providing you with the access you need and deserve to familial funds? Threatening to take custody of your children? All of these are different forms of abuse, and not a single one of them ever involved laying a finger on the other person. Abuse is dangerous—not only can it cause serious physical or emotional harm, but it can also cause serious mental health issues, or even lead to death, substance abuse, or self harm. Abuse is nothing to ever be ignored, and if you ever suspect that someone is being abused, reaching out to them in private can be the right thing to do. If you are the victim of abuse, you do not have to suffer any longer—you can take a stand and leave once and for all. It may be intimidating or seem entirely impossible to leave, especially if you are financially dependent upon the abuser, but you can make that call to leave if you choose to do so. What is Abuse? Consider for a moment the definition of the word “Abuse.” If you were to look up a definition online or in a dictionary, you would be provided with something along the lines of misuse of an item, or to treat with cruelty or violence. Abuse can be used to refer to the misuse of, for example, alcohol, during which the one drinking frequently drinks far too much, whether due to addiction or due to some other factor. Abuse of power can happen when a judge passes a judgment that is entirely designed to benefit the judge or push an agenda rather than making the right call. You may even hear people say that items are abused, such as saying that a child’s favorite toy has really stood up to a lot of abuse. This means that, despite rough usage, the toy has held up. Despite the wide range of how the word itself can be used, within the scope of this book, we will be focusing solely on the definition of abuse is relevant to the mistreatment or harm to others. More specifically, we are going to add one extra element when discussing abuse within this book—it must be intentional. Effectively, then, abuse will be defined for the duration of this book as the intentional act of harming another person for reasons other than self defense. The only justifiable act of harming another person or animal is to either consume after humanely hunting or slaughtering or in self defense during which you were not the aggressor. This means, then, that any time that someone hurts you intentionally, no matter how you were hurt, you have suffered abuse. Of course, abuse will vary in severity. You could be slapped on the bottom by some random stranger walking down the street, which would obviously be distressing, but not necessarily life changing. You could also be forcibly held down and violently assaulted. Both are still abuse, and both are still wrong, but on the spectrum, there is a vast range of differences in severity. One thing still holds true—you deserve to live your life free of abuse. This is a message that you will see repeated throughout this book because it is so critical to hear. You deserve to be treated with kindness, not abused. Who is Abused? However, though you and those around you deserve to be treated with kindness, you are far from alone. Abuse runs rampant around the world. Especially in the United States, the statistics on abuse are extreme. It is believed that 1/3 of women and 1/5 of men have been abused either physically, sexually, or psychologically, at some point in their lives. This abuse happens to people of all ages. Babies and young children are common targets. 1/3 teens have reported already having experienced violence and abuse during their own relationships. Effectively, anyone can be the victim of abuse. Rich or poor, young or old, abuse can happen to anyone. In fact, every single minute, 24 people are raped, abused, or stalked by a domestic or intimate partner within the United States alone. 48% of adults within the US have found themselves on the receiving end of psychological abuse within their lifetimes If you are the victim of abuse, do not be afraid to reach out—you are truly not alone, and other people can relate to you and your struggles. Just because abuse is so rampant and prevalent does not mean that you need to take it without fighting back, nor should you simply accept it. You can choose to leave. You can choose to stand up for yourself. You can choose to escape. It is not always easy, but you can do it. Reasons for Abuse First and foremost, it is important to acknowledge that abuse is never justifiable. It is never acceptable to intentionally hurt someone else, no matter how angry they have made you, nor how much they refuse to obey. People are not designed to be puppets, and no matter the relationship that you have, you always have free will. You can choose when to be sexually intimate and when you do not want to. You can decide what you will eat and what you will refuse. You decide who you talk to and who you will avoid. No matter what you have done, even if you have been unfaithful or done something that your partner is disapproving of, you do not even deserve to be intentionally harmed. Ultimately, most abuse endured is because one person desires power—they want to be in control, and the best way to do that is to force the other person to submit. They may believe that they own their partner, or that they have some say in what their partners are allowed to do, especially in marriage. However, this could not be further from the truth—you can choose who you want to associate with if you so choose. Other times, abuse is endured because the abuser believes that his or her needs come first—they want to feel like their partner should always prioritize their needs and will use abusive tactics to make it happen. They will intentionally remove the idea of equality within the relationship, making it clear to the victim that the abuser is dominant and more important. In doing so, the victim often eventually internalizes that he or she must always make the other person happy. Effectively, then, abuse is a power play. It is done to assert control over the victim to ensure that the victim feels powerless. In feeling powerless, the victim believes that he or she has no choice but continue to endure the abuse without argument or question. This is part of the reason why so many victims refuse to leave—they feel like they cannot. Abuse on its own is learned—people are rarely just abusive without having ever been exposed to it before. It may have been learned during childhood when abusive tactics were used growing up, such as a son growing up around an abusive father and naturally behaving exactly the same way toward his own partners and children in adulthood. It could have been seen on television or other forms of media and slowly internalized over a lifetime of exposure that has normalized abusive tendencies. What does not cause abuse, however, is the victim, and if the abuser ever tells you that it is your own fault that he or she acts that way, then they are in denial or trying to convince you of something that is not true to keep you under their thumbs for longer. Drugs and alcohol also do not cause abuse— someone who is intoxicated may be abusive, but it is because those tendencies are already present. Stress does not cause abuse, either. Someone who is not abusive will not see abuse as an option at all. Types of Abuse Abuse of all kinds is traumatic, no matter who it was that was abusive to you. While people tend to have an easy time recognizing physical abuse thanks to the literal marks it can leave on someone else, people often struggle to recognize other types of abuse as well. Despite the fact that abuse is as rampant as it is, people do not tend to recognize most kinds, and this chapter aims to change that. Reading through this section can be incredibly valuable to you. As you do, you can become capable of identifying and recognizing several of the more insidious forms of abuse that can usually slip under the radar. For example, some people may strongly feel that it is impossible for a husband to sexually abuse a wife—that is not true. When you know about some of the more obscure or less apparent forms of abuse, you will be in a far better position to resist that abuse or recognize when it is time to exit the relationship. Remember, no matter how much that your abuser tells you that you are stuck, or that you have no choice but to submit, remember that there are options out there for you. All you need to do is reach out. You do not need to live with abuse, and you can make a plan to leave. There are people who work on domestic violence hotlines that are ready and willing to help you. They can help you find resources in your local area and help you come up with a plan to help, no matter where you are or what your situation is. You do not deserve to live with any form of abuse. Primarily, abuse comes in several forms. We will look in particular about six of these right now: Emotional, financial, physical, sexual, spiritual, and narcissistic. Each of these happen differently, but they all have the potential to be harmful. You can be hurt by every single one of these forms of abuse, and just because you are not being touched physically does not mean that your abuse is not that bad. Please do not downplay your abuse or try to compare it to the abuse endured by other people. Forms o abuse ye S a A Emotional abuse Emotional abuse, also commonly referred to as psychological, verbal, or mental abuse, is a form of abuse during which the abuser uses mind games and emotions in order to gain control. The abuser wants to be able to manipulate your emotions and your mind in order to make sure that you do not feel secure enough to escape or to make you feel like you are incapable of escaping. This form of abuse is particularly insidious because it never leaves physical marks on the victim and is next to impossible to prove. When you are the victim of emotional abuse, you feel entirely incapable. You feel like you are stuck, but also left doubting whether you are actually being abused or if you are simply too sensitive about the situation. Emotional abuse is real and is wrong, and even though it may not leave a mark on you, it will impact your emotional state severely. Financial abuse Financial abuse is exactly what it sounds like—keeping finances away from the victim or somehow exerting control over the victim. Especially in a marriage, both parties should have equal access to finances, as marriage is generally approached as a team. Unless agreed to prior to that point, if one partner suddenly commandeers all control of the finances or restricts access to the finances, there may be financial abuse occurring. During financial abuse, one party’s access to the funds or to making money is restricted or hurt. Because finances and access to money are necessary to survive, restricting access to these funds can make it impossible to get out of a negative, abusive relationship. Along those lines as well, it is next to impossible to find a home if credit is destroyed. By damaging financial security, the abuser makes it, so the victim is far more reliant on the abuser, meaning that the victim lacks power. It may also encompass one’s credit as well. This is effectively anything that threatens the financial wellbeing of the individual being discussed, whether that is racking up debt, destroying credit, restricting access to money, or even threatening the workplace of the victim. Physical abuse Physical abuse is perhaps the easiest of them all to identify. Physical abuse is particularly known for being painful. It is physical attempts to restrain, subdue, or abuse the victim. In general, if you are being threatened physically or put into a dangerous situation, you are physically abused. One such form of this that people may not realize is kicking the victim out of the car in a dangerous area or leaving him or her locked outside, particularly if it is hot or cold. People have a right to shelter and intentionally interfering with that, making you stay outside, which is a form of physical abuse. This is perhaps the most immediately threatening of the forms of abuse that you can suffer. If you feel that you are at risk for physical abuse, or if you have been hit, you do have rights and repercussions. Please reach out for help and do not tolerate any physical abuse at all. This abuse has a tendency to continually get worse and worse as time goes on, and it is believed that a staggering three women per day are killed by their intimate partners just within the US alone. This is a terrifying number and is all the more reason that the instant a relationship turns physical, it should be ended. Sexual abuse Sexual abuse is something that people think is cut and dry, but actually has some nuances to it. You may feel like you have not been sexually abused if you do not know that certain occurrences are actually considered abusive, but the effects are undeniable. Even if you were unaware that you were sexually abused, you might find that what you have endured may actually be classified in this manner. You do not have to be violently raped by a stranger for your abuse that you have endured to be considered sexual abuse or assault. In fact, you can be assaulted or abused sexually by a partner or even a spouse. Marriage is not a license for free, uncensored access to the other person’s body. Even being pestered for sexual intimacy is a form of sexual abuse—if anything other than your enthusiastic and consensual yes to sexual activity is pursued, you may find that your partner is attempting to intentionally coerce or browbeat you into giving in. Remember, even in marriage, you retain full rights to your body and you are under no obligation to engage in any sort of sexual contact that you wish to avoid. Spiritual abuse Spiritual abuse is another of those forms of abuse that is particularly tricky to identify, but once you know what it is, you are able to point it out a bit easier. This is any time that an abuser attacks a victim’s choice in religion. It can happen to people from any religious type, and anyone can suffer from it. It is done to directly attack one’s religion, which is oftentimes one of the most intimate, innermost parts of their own belief system. To attack their belief system is to truly attack the individual, and it can be incredibly distressing. It can happen during a relationship, especially in contexts such as one person intentionally berating the other’s religious choices or preventing the victim from being able to practice. Sometimes, the abuser may even use their own or your own religious texts to justify the abuse, pointing to lines that are being misconstrued, such as allowing the man to lead with the woman falling back and obeying at all costs. Narcissistic abuse Finally, the last form of abuse that is being discussed here is narcissistic abuse. Narcissistic abuse refers to any abuse that has occurred by a narcissist. This book will spend several chapters discussing the narcissist and narcissistic abuse as it progresses. In particular, narcissists are particularly insidious with their abuse. They tend to be abusive simply because they do not see any reason for them not to get their way. They have a distorted view of reality around them, and because of that, they tend to try to browbeat everything into fitting their own views on the world. This is quite problematic—when they are actively trying to make everything else conform to their delusions, they end up harming several people in the process. More specifically, however, the narcissists are masters at manipulation and abuse. They are skilled in making the abuse that they are dishing out seem like it must be the fault of the victim, and they will not acknowledge anything beyond that as being the truth. In fact, they are so certain about their own viewpoints, that they will claim that anyone else’s perception of the truth is false. For now, all that matters is that you know that narcissistic abuse exists in its own category and that it encompasses all types of abuse. We will delve into this topic in depth later. Effects of Abuse When you have been the victim of abuse, you may find that you have begun to change. You may not be able to notice it at first, but eventually, you notice that you are no longer the person you used to be. In particular, you may find some of the following effects are present in your life. These are effectively your emotional injuries in response to the harm that you have endured. Remember, some abuse can happen without ever leaving a physical mark, but the emotional scars that are there remain potentially for a lifetime. Some of these effects are: e Anxiety (including post traumatic stress disorder): When you have been the victim of abuse, you are likely constantly living in a state of hyper vigilance. You are afraid of what is going to happen if you remain in the relationship, but you are afraid of what will happen when you leave as well. Post traumatic stress disorder is also a common anxiety disorder that many abuse victims suffer from, and this will be discussed in depth in Chapter 7: The Effects of Narcissistic Abuse. e Depression: When you are constantly afraid for your life or sense of self, it becomes incredibly common to suffer from depression as well as you lose your ability to enjoy life. You may struggle to actively enjoy what is happening around you or feel like you cannot get out of bed. You may suffer from a lack of energy and lack of motivation to take care of yourself, your responsibilities, and your home. Risky behaviors: When you have been abused, you may find that you spend more time than usual acting out. You may, for example, speed or drive without a seatbelt. You may engage in risky, unprotected sex with others. You may use or abuse drugs. Ultimately, you do not care about what will happen to you, so you do not take the necessary precautions that would be used to keep you safe. Substance abuse: You may even decide to self medicate through drugs and alcohol, or find that your abusive partner encourages you to feed your addiction. You find that drugs or alcohol serve as a sort of release and escape from the abuse and this can very quickly spiral into abuse of the substance, and potentially even addiction or overdoes if you are not careful. Self harm or thoughts of suicide: Another common coping mechanism is self harm. You may intentionally hurt yourself to provide some feelings of control over the situation that you have found yourself in. While unhealthy, you feel like you are able to control when you hurt, and that can make you feel like you have reclaimed some power. If you are having thoughts of self harm or suicide, it is important that you reach out to a licensed medical professional, as this is considered a medical emergency and you will be able to get the help that you need. Low self esteem: When you are constantly being told that you are undeserving or unworthy, you will eventually internalize it and believe that it is true. This does not mean that you are weak or make it true—it just means that you have heard it so often that you believe it. However, lacking self esteem can then mean that you do not trust yourself and that you doubt your ability to get yourself out of the relationship. Avoidance of relationships or other triggers: If you have been abused in the past, you may choose to avoid relationships altogether. Especially if you have suffered on more than one occasion, you may just feel like it is simpler to avoid the relationships altogether than it is to try to find a healthy one. The Cycle of Abuse Before we address the rest of this book, there is one important concept that must be remembered—abuse exists in a cycle. Not only is this cycle generational, meaning that children who grew up in an abusive environment grow up to create abusive environments themselves, but also in the sense that abuse within a single relationship tends to occur within a very specific, predictable cycle during which things are sometimes comfortable and happy, but other times, abuse is highly prevalent. People often take those honeymoon periods, the periods during which the abuse is absent, as signs that the relationship is worth salvaging, but consider this for a moment: If the relationship were only abusive all of the time, would anyone want to stay? No one would want to put up with nonstop abuse—there has to be some sort of good there as well to keep the individual interested in staying and motivated to continue to return to the relationship. The cycle of abuse occurs in four distinct stages: Tensions building, an incident, reconciliation, and the calm. Building Stage 4: The Stage 2: The Calm Incident During the first stage of tensions building, there is a tension present in the relationship. You may feel like communication is breaking down or that you and your partner are simply constantly annoying each other. The victim may feel like they are heading toward another incident of abuse and try anything to try to please and placate the abuser in hopes of avoiding it. Communication will continue to degrade, and there may be frequent arguments or disagreements during this period. The second stage, known as the incident stage, is when the abuse happens. Usually, there is a big blowout—it may be physical abuse, or it may be an argument or an attempt to control or coerce the victim. The abuser may yell, call names, threaten to leave, intimidate, attempt to force sexual intimacy, or attempt other forms of violence or abuse. This is the big, scary event that the victim was trying to avoid. After the incident, the abuser realizes that the abuse has occurred and moves into damage control. In particular, he will aim for reconciliation, which refers to the name of this stage. They will often apologize, but that apology is generally insincere and meant to simply placate the victim. The victim is oftentimes blamed at this time, or the abuser will deny that abuse has happened at all. It may also be downplayed in order to convince the victim that things are not as bad as the victim may see them. Also common at this stage is an apology with a promise to do better, seek counseling, or work somehow on the relationship. However, these efforts to better the relationship rarely, if ever, actually occur. Finally, after reconciliation is complete comes the calm in the storm—this is the brief respite during which the victim is reminded of all of the reasons he or she fell in love or was pulled into the relationship in the first place. This is the stage known as the honeymoon period. During this time, the relationship seems fine—the abuse is forgotten or forgiven, and the abuser is often found showering the victim with affection and gifts. During this period, the victim is reminded of why he or she wants to remain in the relationship. The Challenges of Escaping Abuse At this point, after reading through the struggles that so many people face in abusive relationships, you may have a single question going through your mind—why do they not just leave? After all, it would be as simple as just walking out the door and not returning, right? While it is always a possibility to leave, there is a lot more to unpack with that. It is a complicated issue—yes, leaving is the right move when you are in an abusive relationship, but there are often outside factors beyond the fact that abuse is present that needs to be considered. Remember, abuse is about exerting power and control, and when you try to leave an abuser, you are directly taking back that power. Thus far, in that relationship, the abuser has used abuse to retain that power, and leaving will not change that. Oftentimes, leaving is the most dangerous time in an abusive relationship— the abuser is likely to retaliate and make leaving as difficult and painful as possible to force the victim into submission. Beyond the danger of leaving, there may be several other factors that come into play within that particular relationship, such as struggling to leave because children are involved. When children are present in the relationship, leaving is no longer as simple as packing up and disappearing, especially if the children are shared. The abusive parent still has rights to the children that cannot simply be revoked without court permission, and that revocation rarely happens. Victims may instead choose to stay in the relationship, so they have access to their children instead of having to share their children with the abusive parent for long stretches of time. Another common challenge and roadblock that people hit is that of their culture or religion. Many cultures and religions reject the idea of divorce or separation, and others still expect subservience of women to the men. When you are told that you must be obedient to your husband and that your husband is in the right to hit or hurt you, you are going to feel like you cannot leave. You are going to be so caught up in what is right by your culture and in your relationship that escaping becomes incredibly frowned upon. If you know that you cannot divorce in the eyes of your religion, or that you risk your culture rejecting you for giving up on your relationship, you may find that you are happier keeping your current community, even if that means tolerating the abuse. Some people simply do not have the physical capacity to leave due to an illness or disability They may not be mobile enough to live on their own, or they may require help for basic day to day survival, and they feel like their best chance is staying in the relationship and dealing with the abuse. They may even have significant health issues that prevent them from being able to take care of their children, so instead of leaving the relationship, they stay to continue to live with their children in an effort to protect them. Other people may find that they are too embarrassed to reach out for help because of the stigmas surrounding abuse. If you have been the victim of abuse, it can be difficult to reach out to others. Especially if your partner has spent the relationship telling you that everything is your own fault, you may feel like you will be harshly judged for your own victimization, despite the fact that the victim is never deserving of abuse. Sometimes, fear holds the individual back. Perhaps your partner has threatened suicide or to hurt you if you leave, or you worry about how you will be able to support yourself and your children without another person helping to pay for household necessities. You may be afraid that your abuser will not go without a fight and that the abuse will escalate if you attempt to leave. In particular with regards to fear, in many cases, immigration status can also play a significant role as well if the victim is not documented within the country, they oftentimes feel like they have to put up with it, as if they go to court, or if the victim reaches out for help, the victim will simply be deported. Especially if the individual has children that are citizens of the country that the victim is undocumented within, the victim may remain silent in order to avoid being deported and separated. A significant lack of resources can also leave someone suffering from abuse of any kind feeling entirely trapped in a bad situation, and the abusers know this. This is exactly why they will take advantage of financial abuse to make leaving harder. You may not have the money to pay for a home for yourself and your children. You may not have a car to drive away in. You may not have access to the finances in the family, and even if you are actively contributing to them, you may not have access. If you simply do not have the resources, you may be afraid to try, especially if you are pregnant or have children. Sometimes simply not having support from friends or family can make you feel trapped and alone. Without access to other people to talk to, you may find that you cannot discuss what is happening, nor do you have anyone to reach out to when things get bad. Without a sort of sounding board in someone else, you may find that you do not see the relationship as being as bad as you may initially think, especially if it has been a slow escalation up to that point. Alternatively, you may find that your friends and family members do not see the abuse that you are enduring, and they often try to downplay it or ask if it is truly as bad as you are saying. Of course, one of the most compelling reasons that people find to stay in their relationships despite the abuse is love. They truly love their partners, and that is enough to make sure that they are staying in their relationships that they otherwise would have left. Other times, what can hold you back is love. After all, if you did not love your abuser, you would likely not be willing to put up with the abuse at all. When you love your partner, you may hold onto hope that the abuser will change, as promised, and you will give chance after chance, hoping that you can get the person that you have fallen in love with back. One final reason that you may find that people are likely to stay behind is that the relationship and the abuse has been normalized. This means that it seems entirely normal to you instead of as something that may be a huge red flag. Think of how, in some cultures, it may be entirely fine to make eye contact and smile, but in others, eye contact is seen as disrespectful and rude—eye contact is not normalized in those countries and cultures. If you have grown up around abuse and it has simply become normalized, you will not see the problem. If you grew up in a household where the parents regularly yelled at each other, you might feel like yelling is entirely normal when mad. You feel like these unhealthy coping mechanisms are nothing but passionate expressions of feelings and do not acknowledge the abuse because you do not recognize it. Chapter 2: Recognizing Emotional Abuse For the next several chapters, we will be specifically addressing emotional abuse. You now know what it is, at least on the surface—you know that emotional abuse is a form of psychological control and just how dangerous it may be. However, do you know how to recognize it? Do you know how to label several of the most common abuse tactics? This particular form of abuse tends to be incredibly covert—it is designed to be hidden in plain sight, and in reading this chapter, you will learn how to identify it. If you can stop and think of a time during which you felt like you were not good enough, like your partner was doing you a huge favor by staying with you, it may be time to reevaluate your relationship. If you have ever come to the realization that the voice that you were using to talk about yourself as the voice of someone else instead of your own, you may have suffered from emotional abuse at some point. Emotional abuse is commonly referred to as verbal or psychological abuse, and it is designed to make you feel bad about yourself. It is meant to make you feel like you are not worthy, that you are not deserving of respect, and that you are not in control. The whole purpose of emotional abuse is that dominance over the victim, designed to grant the abuser free reign over the individual. The more emotional abuse one has endured, most often, the more subservient they become. They stop trying to fight back and slowly do begin to believe that they were deserving of the abuse. This chapter will guide you through learning to recognize the signs of abuse. You will learn how to identify the most common behaviors exhibited by the abuse victims, as well as the long term effects of suffering from emotional abuse. From there, you will be guided through several common and favored emotional abuse tactics designed to keep the victim on edge, out of control, and subservient. Signs of Emotional Abuse within the Relationship It can be difficult to spot an abusive relationship, especially if you are in the outside looking in. However, an emotionally abusive relationship typically looks drastically different from a healthy one, and if you are able to spend enough time around someone in an emotionally abusive relationship, you may find that you are able to identify several of these signs on a regular basis. Take the time to familiarize yourself with these common signs of emotional abuse within a relationship. If you notice that a friend or family member has a relationship with several of these signs, you may want to consider reaching out to ensure that everything is okay and offer your own support if it is needed. These signs can be incredibly stressful for both the one suffering from the abuse and the one who may be witnessing such abhorrent behaviors. If you have felt like a relationship that you have been exposed to seems like it is not quite right, it may be that it is manipulative and abusive in nature. In these instances, many people feel like turning away is the right thing to do, but if you see someone struggling in a relationship with several red flags, such as the ones that will be discussed in a moment, the kind thing to do is reach out. Identifying an emotionally abusive relationship can be quite concerning and nerve wracking, especially if it is your relationship or the relationship of a loved one. However, if you can identify it, you can help the other person escape. You can offer your support. You can understand that the behaviors of isolation and avoidance are probably not coming from the victim but rather forced by the abuser. Generally, identifying an abusive partner of one of your friends or family members can be quite obvious—while the victim may be unwilling to admit it, everyone knows when they are having to walk on eggshells. However, oftentimes, when people have to deal with their friends or family members being abused, they feel like they must choose between either begrudgingly tolerating the abuser, despite being incredibly concerned about the behavior out of fear of being cut off if they do not, or they do say something, only to have the abuser freeze them out. After all, the only way that you can truly help someone get out of an abusive relationship is if they truly want to escape it. If they are not interested in that escape, you are not going to be able to do much other than offer support until that time during which they do decide to leave. Now, imagine that your best friend, Cara, has a boyfriend named Austin. Cara is the sweetest young woman that you know—she was never particularly self confident, but she was so kind that no one was bothered by the lack of self esteem. They simply gently reminded her that she was a well loved member of the social group and always happily invited her over. Seemingly out of nowhere, Cara met him—Austin was a man a few years older than her, but she did not mind. She was happy because he showered her with lavish attention and love. He was always wanting to spend time with her, sending constant messages to her and checking in on her. If she did not answer a text message within five minutes of it being sent, however, he would call her, and whatever he was saying was leaving Cara visibly distressed. When she would get off of the phone, she would apologize and leave, saying that he was demanding that she get home, or he would not be there later that night. Over time, as Austin grew more and more comfortable, you and your friends noticed several red flags in the relationship. You saw how he would yell at Cara on a regular basis, both in public and out of public scrutiny. She would recount times during which he would scream and berate her to her face at home, and when you tried to point out that she did not deserve it, she simply shrugged and said that she deserved it because she was not particularly smart and she was lucky to have him. Soon, it seemed like even your social nights grew affected by the presence of Austin—he would not allow Cara to go to those hangout sessions any longer simply because he could not be there as well. In fact, she slowly was only allowed to go to places that he was present at as well, claiming that she was promiscuous and would be cheating on him if she were left to her own devices. You noticed that when he was around, he seemed to have knowledge of private conversations, and it became clear that he was monitoring her text messages. Soon, her social media accounts disappeared altogether. Over time, you noticed that Cara was becoming more stressed out. She seemed to withdraw from the group more and more, until one day, she broke down and told you that he had been threatening to kill himself if she left him, and though she wanted to leave so badly, she felt like she had no choice but to stay. She described the look of absolute, unadulterated fury in his eyes when she said that she wanted space and told you that she was certain he was going to seriously injure her. It was only when she shook off her interest in leaving as a joke and that she wanted to see how much he loved her that he seemed to settle down. Stop and see what problems you can identify within that short passage about your friend Cara and Austin. What was Austin doing that was problematic? Which behaviors would need to be entirely cut for the relationship to retain any sort of semblance of healthiness? Would it be possible for that to become a healthy relationship at all with how far it had flown into an abusive relationship? If you took the time, you may have noticed at least six distinctive red flags about Austin’s behavior that would be considered abusive. He spent a significant time yelling at her, for one. He would intimidate everyone with how loudly his voice would carry, and it constantly kept Cara down. The yelling was constantly joined by insults and berating that were so extreme that Cara herself was convinced that she must deserve it. There was no sense of privacy within the relationship, and it seemed like Austin was fully convinced that Cara needed some sort of chaperone to be able to involve herself in any group activities. You knew that she was not the kind of girl to ever fall for infidelity, but he was convinced that she was. She had to check in on a regular basis—yet another red flag, and eventually, she was required to take him anywhere that she wanted to go to make sure that she was not getting caught up in any funny business. Yelling and verbal abuse (berating, name calling, etc.) ack of prive in the relationship tant mi on require out Abuser must go every Defending Identifying Emotional Abuse Toward Yourself Now that you are becoming confident in recognizing an emotionally abusive relationship for other people, you may be wondering whether your own relationship is emotionally abusive. You may already know the answer to this or knew that it was abusive before reading this book, or you may suspect that it is abusive, and if this is the case, you may want to pay close attention to these signs. Let’s take some time to delve into Cara’s perspective on her abusive relationship in order to really see the victim’s perspective. These signs that are coming up are all huge red flags that Cara should have acknowledged, but she was far too afraid to. She may have been blinded by her love for her partner, or she may simply have been caught up in the idea of how great it would be to be in a relationship, and she was willing to put up with the beginning of the abuse. Ultimately, the only way that you can really identify emotional abuse will be through looking to find how you are feeling at any given point. You must be able to recognize your own emotions, developing that self awareness of your own current states. There are several patterns for how the victims of emotional abuse usually feel, and while the victim may acknowledge that he or she is unhappy, it can be difficult to really articulate how they feel if they do not know how to convey it. Reading this section through Cara’s perspective is an attempt to remedy that. We will look at how Cara has been feeling, self reflecting on whether she is in an abusive relationship. From the outside looking in, you may already be confident that she is being abused—because she is. However, it is much harder from the victim’s side to identify this. Firstly, Cara realizes that she is not happy. She knows that, but she is struggling to identify exactly how she is not happy or why she is miserable. She has a general understanding that the behaviors she has been exposed to are problematic, but she does not quite know how to articulate it. She is not sure if she is just overreacting or acting like things are far worse than they actually are—and then she realizes it. She feels like she cannot trust herself. A favorite tactic of the emotional abuser is called gaslighting—it will be discussed in greater depth later, but for all intents and purposes, it is meant to make you feel like you cannot trust your own perceptions of reality. It is designed to make you feel like you are always wrong about how you see the world, or that you are always overreacting, when in fact, you may be right. This is because you will likely rely on your partner if you feel like your Own perceptions are wrong, and the abuser is counting on this. This is exactly what happened with Austin—she constantly felt like her own emotions were wrong. She internalized the abuse and blamed it on herself because she was parroting what he had to say, not what she truly believed about herself. This is incredibly powerful to acknowledge—it means that she understands the root of her problem. She has lost trust in herself. In losing trust in herself, she feels like she is out of control, and for good reason. She has no real control over her life, what she does, or where she goes. She is constantly told what she can do and why she cannot go see other people. She has found that she has fallen into compliance simply because it was better than dealing with the alternative—his threats of suicide and his anger outbursts that would leave her afraid of her partner. Being afraid of him is yet another problem. After all, you should never feel like you have to be afraid of your partner or what he will do. If you feel like you are afraid of your partner, you may need to reevaluate and figure out what is going on to make you feel afraid. You may find the answer relatively simply, or you may realize that it is an unconscious sign that you should be more careful or distrustful of your partner. Unfortunately, Cara had spent so long listening to her fears that she was struggling to escape. His threats of suicide left her feeling three different ways: she was afraid to care for herself because trying to do so constantly angered him. In his mind, she was meant to shower him with what he wanted, and her needs were entirely meaningless. She was constantly feeling guilty due to his own manipulative techniques. Though she could never quite articulate it, she always found herself feeling guilty for everything. It really beat down her sense of self esteem, and she struggled to come back from it. Finally, between wanting to avoid the fear and the guilt, she found herself preferring to walk on eggshells around her partner. She was happier just keeping him happy and complying with whatever was asked of her because compliance meant that she did not have to worry about him being angry or having an outburst. It was easy to just placate him and keep him happy. Further analysis and self reflection would help Cara realize two more important aspects of her life that were major red flags: She constantly apologized, even when whatever happened had nothing to do with her. Despite the fact that she was not at fault, it was easier to apologize in an attempt to placate an unfortunate side effect of walking on eggshells on a regular basis. She found that, despite loving Austin with all her heart, she no longer craved intimacy with him. This is a massive red flag—people who love each other typically want to be intimate. They do this to get as close as possible to each other and do so from a position of trust and love. However, when you no longer feel safe or trust your relationship, you instead find that you are constantly panicking instead. People need to feel safe to be interested in intimacy, and people being abused rarely feel that safety necessary. Amidst this all, however, perhaps the most confusing thing of all for Cara was that she felt an intense need to protect the abuser. She felt like she would have to rationalize away his behaviors and tell everyone around her that he was not so bad because she loves him. She wanted to be able to protect him precisely because she does love him. These are all incredibly common realizations that guide people from realizing that they are, in fact, in an emotionally abusive relationship. They realize that their own lives have become so relatable to the account of our fictional friend, Cara, that they are shocked. They may realize just how dangerous the relationship actually is, and in realizing that, they can begin the process of healing as they continue to progress. Effects of Emotional Abuse Emotional abuse has all sorts of negative effects that last far longer than the relationship. You may find that you carry these signs with you well after having ended the relationship, and in some cases, they will not go away without any attempts to get therapy or seek some other way to treat it. These are effectively the scars of your abuse—you may not have ever received any physical ones, but the emotional ones are just as real and just as enduring. A Damaged Sense of Self If you have survived an emotionally abusive relationship, there is a good chance that you have had your own self esteem damaged in some way. The emotional abuser’s tactic is to make you feel like you are not good enough, and they are frequently quite good at this. The end result is that you frequently see yourself as damaged or not particularly valuable, and you may not even realize that you do this. You may put your needs last or simply ignore your needs altogether. You may find that you regularly tell yourself that you cannot do what you want to. You may self sabotage or procrastinate because you do not feel like you are capable. Alexithymia (an inability to identify emotions) This is a fancy word for an inability to accurately identify or feel your own emotions. Effectively, you become impervious to your emotions and instead live a life of numbness. You may have emotions, but you are entirely unaware that they are happening. Even though your body language will show your emotion, if someone asks you, you will deny it, saying that you do not actually feel that emotion. After so long of being emotionally abused and feeling your emotions, you have sort of disconnected from them. Depression Depression is a common long term effect of living in an emotionally abusive relationship simply due to the fact that you are not going to find that you are enjoying life and what you are doing if it is constantly shadowed by the abuse. Even after escaping, you may feel like you cannot find enjoyment. This may present itself as a sort of hopelessness in your life like things can never get better, or that you will always be miserable in your life. Struggling to Concentrate Another common effect of prolonged emotional abuse is the inability to concentrate well. This is often a side effect of depression and anxiety—you are too busy worrying about other things to actually concentrate on what is in front of you. Struggling to Sleep, or Sleeping too Much Commonly associated with depression, emotional abuse can leave you feeling too on edge to sleep at all, leading to insomnia, or it can lead to you sleeping more than you should be as a form of escapism to avoid facing reality. Anxiety A common side effect of living life feeling like everything that you do is being scrutinized is anxiety. When you have walked on eggshells for so long, your body naturally transitions to being in a default state of arousal and anxiety. This means that you are far more likely to suffer from it, even after escaping the situation. Chronic Pain A life lived with anxiety and depression often causes all sorts of physical problems as well, and you may find that you very quickly end up living with chronic pain. Even after going to doctors and getting testing, you find that there is no particular reason for the pain that you are feeling and it gets lumped in with your depression and anxiety. Emotional Abuse Tactics Emotional abusers have all sorts of tactics that they like to pull from to keep their victims firmly under their thumbs. These tactics can seem like they are not anything at all, such as finding ways to make disparaging comments under the guise of a joke, or they can be truly harmful, such as directly telling someone to hurt or kill themselves. These different forms of emotional abuse are all dangerous in their own ways, and you should be on the lookout for them whenever possible. Gaslighting Gaslighting is particularly insidious as a form of emotional abuse. It is designed to make you feel like you cannot trust yourself, making you feel like you are unstable, untrustworthy, and like you are going crazy. It is one of those techniques that usually takes plenty of time to set up, but once it is set up, you feel like you cannot escape it. When someone gaslights you, they deny that what you are saying is true. They may start out by telling you that you were wrong about something little or unimportant, such as saying that you are misremembering some small, insignificant detail about something. Over time, the details become more significant, and the abuser eventually denies the thing that happens right in front of you, and you feel like you have to believe them. Especially because at that point, there is a perceived pattern of always getting things wrong and feeling like you cannot possibly know what you are talking about, you simply take what your partner says at face value. Because you inherently trust your partner, you do not think that he or she would be trying to intentionally lie to you. Emotional Manipulation Emotional manipulation is the act of making you feel a certain emotion deliberately in order to get you to act accordingly. If they want you to do something for them, they will find some way to make you feel an emotion that is conducive to their desired response, and they then get their way. For example, if your partner does not like your sister, your partner may make it a point to tell you that your sister did something unforgivable to get you angry. With your anger, you then pick a fight with your sister to defend your partner, and you end up severing ties. Did that event that your partner said ever happen? Probably not, or at least, not the way that your partner made it sound, but your partner did get you to end the relationship without him having to be the one telling you that he wants you to. FOG FOG stands for Fear, Obligation, Guilt. It is a common form of emotional manipulation that keeps you feeling one of those three emotions to keep you under control. Unlike general emotional manipulation, however, when you are kept under FOG, your partner is doing something to maintain it. Your partner must have something held over you to make you feel obligated so that he or she can make you feel guilty in order to get the desired response from you. Because this is a bit more intensive, it is typically reserved for relationships like parents to children, simply because it is easy to lord over someone else that you birthed and raised them. However, a romantic partner or friend may not have something similar to hold over their victim’s head. Character Assassination Character assassination is the art of making you feel like you are a flawed individual in order to keep power over you. It may involve making it a point to control you via means such as telling you that you are always so difficult or that you never get anything right. It could involve telling you that you are worthless or useless. It could involve telling lies about you to other people as well. Ultimately, character assassination is done to make you seem less competent or less well liked. Especially if you are ending the relationship with the abuser, you may find that he or she will tell everyone around you that you are irrational, on drugs, or otherwise doing something that is incredibly frowned upon. Chapter 3: Fighting Emotional Abuse Emotional abuse is terrifying. No one wants to feel like they are less than significant or that they need to constantly walk on eggshells. If you are being emotionally abused, you may find that you are longing for the days of being happy, if you had ever felt that way in the past. You may have found that the abuse is terrifying. You may feel broken, beaten, or hopeless. It may seem like escape is impossible and that this will be your life forever. Remember, there is hope out there for you. It may take you time and effort to get out, but you can do it. You must remember that you will be playing the long game and acknowledge that the hard work will be worth it when you are finally living a life that you enjoy. You can attain that happiness that you deserve, and most of the time, you can cut off contact with your abuser in some way. Unless you share minor children, upon splitting ties or divorcing from the abuser, you have no reason to remain in contact. Yes, even if that relationship is with a parent, your own adult child, or another family member, you can break free and leave the relationship for good. However, that will take time. This chapter seeks to get you stabilized before you are able to begin getting out. Think of this chapter as your sort of safety floatation device—it is your first line of defense against drowning in the ocean of abuse you have been stranded in for so long. Hold on just a little bit longer, and you will find safety. Within this chapter, you will be provided with nine distinct methods that you can use to cope with your abuse in the moment. It is oftentimes impossible to simply up and leave for many people, and that is exactly why this chapter sets out to make sure that you are able to cope with the abuse before you can escape. It will be a process, but using these methods will help you find some sort of solace in the midst of the abuse. You will be actively protecting yourself, your psyche, and your future by planning to leave and using these methods. Keep in mind that these methods are specifically meant to combat emotional abuse. If you are suffering from physical abuse, you absolutely need to get out as soon as possible, and you can usually do so with the help of local law enforcement. If there is physical abuse, you should be able to file for a restraining order at your local courthouse or press charges at your local police station. Physical abuse can very quickly go downhill, so it is important that it is immediately met with an escape and any and all legal help that you can attain. When you are fighting emotional abuse, there is not typically a threat to your life or physical health, and these techniques will help you retain your emotional health. Emotional abuse requires you to react to it, so if you refuse to engage, distance yourself from the abuse, and have your own methods to sort of combat it as you get all of your legal ducks in a row, you can usually avoid the brunt of it. If you know that your partner is abusive emotionally and is telling you that you are useless from a point of wanting to manipulate you, you may be able to remind yourself that this is just your abuser being an abuser and that it is not true, or you can point out the ways that you are not worthless for yourself to acknowledge. Now, without further ado, let’s begin to address several ways that you can use to protect yourself. In arming yourself against the abuse, you may find that it stops being as distressing as it occurs, though it still may bother you. Identifying and Acknowledging The most powerful thing you can do is name the abuse for what it is. This means that you need to be able to acknowledge what it is and recognize it for what it is. In labeling the abuse what it is, you are able to distance yourself from it. It is no longer a matter of you causing problems or not being good enough—now your problem is that you are in a relationship with someone who is abusive. However, that has a relatively simple solution: Leaving. While leaving itself can oftentimes be quite messy and involve its own slew of steps to complete, especially if you are married or have children, being able to acknowledge that the problem is not you, after all, can be incredibly freeing. In acknowledging that you are not the problem or that you are not flawed, you are able to remove the blame from yourself. You are no longer at fault for the pain that you have suffered, and you are able to accurately point that blame firmly where it belongs—with the abuser. Think about the implications about that and the relief that many people would feel in acknowledging that they are not actually useless, unlovable, or whatever else the abuser has tried to convince them. With the blame removed, you may find that you are able to actually find some newfound confidence in yourself—if you are not the problem, then you have no need to fix yourself at that moment. What you need to do is leave the problem because you are not responsible for anyone else. No matter how well intentioned you may be, you cannot change other people in any way. You cannot convince your abuser to be the loving person that you thought he or she was—all you can do is know when it is appropriate to exit the relationship altogether. Preparing to Leave As soon as you have acknowledged the abuse in your relationship, it is time to make your long term plans. What are your end goals? What do you hope to accomplish? What do you want to do with yourself? There is a whole wide world out there away from your abuser, and the world is your oyster. You can do whatever you want without worrying about what the abuser thinks and whether the abuser would agree or ridicule your decisions. Setting that goal for yourself, that long term picture of success, can help yourself to stay motivated. In moments of weakness, and there will be moments of weakness during which you consider that things would be better if you forgave and forgot, you can remember this goal—this picture of what you want in life. That can be the guiding light that keeps you on track. Leaving the relationship is going to be the most dangerous part for you, and for this reason, it is going to require meticulous planning, especially if you have anything joining the two of you together legally. Children will almost always create legal complications during which you will either have to agree to custody or fight over custody, and you will then be looking at interacting with your ex for the rest of you children’s childhoods, as well as during major events in their lives if he happens to take an interest in them as well. For this reason, it is recommended that you spend enough time gathering your evidence. You are planning for the worst while hoping for the best. In particular, leaving has a lot of different nuances that need to be followed that would be incredibly difficult to properly cover in a subchapter, so while preparing to leave is absolutely a step in fighting emotional abuse at the moment, it will also get its own chapter later within the book. Chapter 9 will be dedicated to making sure that you know how to leave the relationship, guiding you through the most critical parts and what you need to make sure that you have. Avoid Triggering Abuse While you are present in the same home with the abuser, it is important to go through the effort of actively avoiding triggering any abuse. While it is normally never okay to expect the victim to accommodate the abuser, in this case, it can help you slip through the next weeks or months while you gather up everything that you will need and make your case just a bit easier. This means that you will need to understand what your partner’s triggers are. That can be a bit difficult to identify and may take a significant amount of time, but if you can do so, you avoid having to deal with as much of the abuse. If you wish to figure out your partner’s triggers, you will need to think back on all of the times that you have seen your partner explode on you. What has caused the explosion? Why did they do it? Can you see a pattern in constantly exploding with specific stimuli? Figuring out what tends to trigger the abuse can be enough to help you avoid most of the iterations of it. Perhaps the best way to avoid it is to simply be very agreeable. Do what is expected of you without argument. Think of it as keeping the peace until you can escape, treating it as a part of your long term plan rather than as a weakness on your part. There is nothing weak about being willing to accept what you are being told, no matter how degrading it is, in order to escape. Doing so is the epitome of strength, showing your true dedication as a survivor. You will survive the abuse, even if it means lowering yourself and being willing to not fight back for a short period of time. Stress Management Of course, being willing to take that abuse means that you will likely be quite stressed out as well. After all, having someone tell you that you cannot do anything right can be incredibly stressful. You may feel like you have done your best, only to have the narcissist or abuser come by and laugh in your face. Think of how a child feels after having spent an hour building a sandcastle, only to have it immediately kicked down by a bully. This is similar to the feelings you may have when you are actively trying your best, only to find that your abuser is willing to disparage your attempts. Of course, the narcissist or abuser just wants to get a rise out of you—if they are able to goad you into a response, telling you that you are terrible and that you need to stop trying because your attempts are never going to be salvageable anyway, they can then use your anger against you. You will play right into their trap rather than refusing to play the game at all. The best way to avoid having an outburst of your own in response is developing several stress management techniques that will work for you. Ultimately, this will involve discovering what works best for you. Do you do best with working out or going for a jog after being stressed out? Maybe you want to meditate? Do you enjoy art? All of that can help keep you cool over time. However, when you are in the moment, what you really need is a grounding technique that will help you stay present. Doing so can help you delay yourself and your behaviors just long enough that you will be able to avoid doing something that would potentially be dangerous. In particular, we will take a look at a simple breathing and grounding technique that will involve you utilizing all of your senses. When you are feeling stressed, you will want to identify several different sensory stimuli from your surroundings as you take deep breaths. Doing so can help you calm down enough to avoid lashing out. Start by taking in a deep breath. When you do this, you want to inhale for five seconds and exhale for five seconds to make sure that you are calming your body down. With your next breath, identify five things that you can see and acknowledge each consciously. You may see a houseplant, a toy that your child left on the floor, your cat, a chair, and the light that is on in the hallway. With the next breath, you will identify four things that you can hear around you. Then, it will be three items that you can touch. Two items that you can smell in the air, and lastly, one taste that is either in your mouth or lingering in the air. Going through these steps can help you calm yourself—it will distract you from the immediate surge of negativity that you have in response to abuse and allow you to keep a level head. Practice it on your own in private several times before you try to use it to keep yourself calm in the moment when you are actively being manipulated or abused. * Breathe deeply * Breathe deeply * Breathe deeply * Breathe deeply Self Care With all of the toxicity and negativity swirling around you as you endure the abuse, you may feel like you are dragging. What can help you is to actively engage in regular self care as a response. When you are constantly in survival mode, you will exhaust your body. You will constantly find yourself suffering from the negative effects of anxiety and stress hormones that constantly keep you on edge. When you never know where danger will strike next, it can be incredibly difficult to keep yourself safe. Create a routine that you can use to take care of yourself, even as stress feels like it may become insurmountable. When you do this, you are actively making it a point to care for yourself, as your partner has made it clear that he or she has no interest in helping you to heal or be a healthy individual. You will want to make it a point to do several things during your self care routine: Make sure that you get enough sleep regularly. This can be difficult, but make sure that you try to sleep at the same time every night, no matter how stressed you are about life. You want to be able to remain healthy. Keep yourself motivated to actively exercise on a regular basis and eat as healthily as you can. Beyond that, try to find time to care for yourself as well .Routine will be your friend, and actively scheduling in time for yourself, especially to do things that you enjoy, will be critical in keeping you on track and able to cope with the abuse that you may be enduring. Refusing to Engage When you do find that you are being caught in an actively abusive situation, such as your partner deciding then to begin berating you, the most important thing that you can do is refuse to engage. Simply try to tide it over as quickly as possible and agree if you have to. Just tell him okay to get him off your back and then go on with your life. Again, this is not a sign of weakness—you are making it a point to protect yourself from future abuse. You are actively guarding yourself and telling yourself that you are not willing to tolerate it. This is a good thing—you are showing true strength. While most people will usually advocate for a lie being left unchallenged becomes the truth, that is not necessarily true with the abusive partner. The lies are being told whether you are around or not anyway, and you are safer in not attempting to counter them at all. It becomes easier to simply agree and move on until you are free to escape. If you are not wanting to tolerate the abuse in the first place, you need to make it a point to focus on surviving long enough to escape. We are not talking about someone jokingly telling everyone that you happened to be the one who ate all of the cake in the workplace overnight or something else foolish—you are considering being berated and told that you are not worthy as an individual. Agreeing and moving on may get your abuser off your back sooner. Avoiding Personalization Of course, despite the fact that you are agreeing, you must keep in mind that you are avoiding actually internalizing it. Known as personalization, you may find that sometimes, it is hard not to take what the manipulator or abuser is saying personally. However, keep in mind that despite the fact that the abuser is saying this and despite the fact that the abuser is someone that you likely love, and it can be hard to hear your loved one telling you that you are nothing. Try to approach hearing this abuse the way that you would hear a child snapping at you—if your 4 year old child called you a butt face because you told your child to eat his veggies so he could go to bed, you would not live life believing that you actually have a butt for a face. Instead, you would probably shrug it off, roll your eyes about it behind your child’s back, and move on without actually taking any offense. Of course, an abuser is going to be flinging far worse insults most of the time. He may tell you that you are ugly, worthless, unlovable, or damaged goods. He may try to tell you that you are incredibly lucky that he has been so willing to look past your flaws to be with someone like you. You are lucky that he has actively been willing to put up with you when you are so dumb, incompetent, or careless. He will say this in a matter of fact tone that may have you tempted to believe it. However, remember that he is lying. He does not care about you. He does not want you to be happy—he wants you to be controlled, and he will use any methods necessary to get that end result. The best way to combat this is to simply stop playing. Let him say what he says, but then remind yourself that it is not true. Reject what he has to say and label it for what it is—an attempt to manipulate you and nothing more. If you can reject it as little more than an attempt to manipulate you, you will be able to avoid much of the stress that goes along with it. His emotional manipulation attempts become infinitely less powerful as soon as you remove the power away from them by refusing to allow them to upset you any longer. It will be tough. It may even hurt, but refusing to play and refusing to take it personally when the abuser spews his lies means that you will be able to escape and heal. Chapter 4: Recovering from Emotional Abuse When you have finally pulled the trigger and acknowledged that you have been in an abusive relationship, it can be hard to know what comes next. You may feel afraid or unsure of how to proceed. You may realize that you are broken inside, or that you have some serious healing to do. This is okay —you have just endured some serious emotional harm, and that takes time to recover from. First and foremost, once you have taken the plunge to leave an emotionally abusive relationship, you should celebrate your power —leaving a relationship is never easy, and even when you have been abused, you likely still have very real feelings for your ex. This is only natural. However, over time, you may feel like you are ready to branch out —that you want to find a new relationship and a new meaning to life. You may find at first that, without proper processing of your abuse, it will constantly come back to haunt you. You may find yourself struggling to trust other people, or feeling like the other shoe is going to drop at any time. You may suffer from anxiety or PTSD—you may suffer from flashbacks or insomnia. You may be sick and tired of the suffering, but not know how to stop it from continuing. When you have suffered from all of this abuse, you may feel like there will be no end to it. However, that end does exist—all you need to do is find it. You can reclaim your life and begin to heal those wounds that you have accrued from your time with an abusive partner. It is not necessarily quick, nor is it easy, but there are actions and steps that you can take to help you recover from emotional abuse, little by little. You may find that it helps to think of this process one day at a time. If one day seems like it is too much to process, try thinking of it like one hour at a time, or even one minute or second at a time if you find that you are feeling particularly sensitive at that point in time. You will inevitably feel moments of weakness during which you want nothing more than to give in and go back to your abuser. This is common—it may be easier to be with the abuser. It may be more familiar and therefore, more comfortable. It may even be that you find that you miss your past and the times during which you and your partner were happy. However, steel your resolve and keep moving forward. You cannot stop an abuser from abusing. This chapter will act as a guide for you to begin to recover from the abuse that you have suffered. Little by little, if you can implement these techniques into your life, and you can follow the steps, you will find that your wounds slowly begin to heal. They may leave their scars, but the injuries will no longer be festering. Take Time to Grieve It can be disconcerting for abuse victims to realize that they do truly miss their abusers even after having suffered at their hands, whether physically or emotionally. However, this is normal. You are grieving the loss of a relationship. You are effectively giving up on the relationship that you thought that you had. You are giving up on the person that you thought you loved, who you may still deeply love, but who did not love or respect you. This can be one of the hardest things you will ever do—you find that you cannot possibly live your life healthily and happily if you do not leave your partner, but you know that leaving your partner will also hurt. It is appropriate to take the time that you find that you need to grieve. Spend the time acknowledging the hurt that you feel and the pain that you have endured. It was not your fault, nor did you deserve it, but that does not make the process any easier. Grief comes in seven distinct stages: shock and denial, pain and guilt, anger and bargaining, depression, the upward turn, reconstruction, and finally, acceptance. These stages are not all linear—you may make progress only to find that a significant event or an anniversary passes and sends you right back to denial or anger. This is normal, and remember that no two people grieve the same way. What remains true, however, is that if you find that your guilt is so overwhelming that you cannot function properly or get through your days, or you find that you are coping unhealthily, it may be time to seek help from a trusted friend or family member, or from a professional that can take the time to talk to you and help you get the tools that you will need. Pain and guilt i a Bt Anger and Jepression P bargaining The upward onstruction tum Acceptance Reclaim Your Life Because emotional abusers so frequently try to take over your life and turn it into their own, making sure that you are obedient and willing to do whatever it takes to please them, you may find that you have lived much of your life losing your time and your life. This means that you have spent weeks, months, or even years sacrificing your time, your desires, and things that you may have wanted to try, all in the name of the relationship. A healthy way to begin to heal from that, from having to sacrifice yourself, your desires, and your happiness, is to reclaim it. Reclaim your time— spend it doing what you want to do. Eat that cake that would have gotten you a disapproving look. Spend time with that friend that your ex hated. Chase after that passion that you had thrown aside after your ex had told you that it was a pipe dream. This may tough to do, especially if you have found that you really suffered within your relationship or if you were regularly punished for doing anything for yourself. However, the best way to ensure that you can reclaim your life for yourself and begin to heal is simply by doing it. Flex those self care muscles and get back into your hobbies. Reach out to those friends and family members that were cast aside. Find new ways to live your life for yourself, and follow through. While it will be difficult at first, you will very quickly fall back into the habit of reclaiming life for yourself and loving every moment of it. Now, this does not mean that you will necessarily be entirely stress free, or that you have healed completely, but you will start to undo those strings installed that told you that you cannot possibly live for yourself. Create Your Boundaries—and Enforce Them Oftentimes, those who are abused feel like they cannot have boundaries, or they do not know how to enforce any boundaries that they do set. They may have always been entirely disregarded, so you feel like they do not matter anyway, or you may have been punished or made to feel crazy any time that you attempted to set a boundary, so it became simpler to instead reject the idea of having those boundaries at all. However, boundaries are healthy. They are normal and expected in most normal relationships. These boundaries are your way of marking that you will only tolerate certain behaviors and that anything beyond those behaviors will be deemed inappropriate and not welcomed by you. For example, a normal and healthy boundary to have is to not accept name calling. You may have a boundary of not being called names, and if anyone were to call you names, you would take a step back and reevaluate that relationship altogether. That is a healthy response to such abuse, and no one would bat an eye at it. However, your abusive ex may have made you feel like setting a reasonable boundary like that is problematic to your relationship or that it means that you do not trust or love your partner. This is not true—even marriages have boundaries, and those boundaries keep the relationship healthy. When you set your boundaries, you are telling other people that you respect yourself enough to not tolerate disrespect. You tell those around you that you care about yourself and that you will not be made to feel less significant or unworthy. You declare that you will protect yourself and not let yourself fall for abuse again. What is important here is that you set those boundaries and enforce them as well. Put distance between yourself and those who want to break your boundaries. If people want to repeatedly stomp all over those boundaries that you have set, then you are probably better off without those people in your life. Even if the person that is constantly breaching your boundary is a family member or a loved one, you are well within your rights to end the relationship and take a huge step back. Remember, if those around you truly loved you, they would respect your boundaries, and anyone who is willing to stomp all over what you want or need does not truly care for you. Forgive Yourself No, this does not mean you should forgive your abuser. However, you are deserving of forgiveness from yourself. What you went through was not okay, and you never should have had to live a life being abused. You did not deserve what happened to you. However, do not waste your time feeling guilty for remaining in that situation for too long. Instead, put your energy toward forgiving yourself. Remember that forgiveness and forgetting are not the same things—you have absolutely learned from the past and just through reading this book right now, you are putting in the effort to do better in the future. You are making it a point to learn how best to protect and defend yourself, and in doing so, you promise yourself that you will take better care of yourself. However, you still deserve to forgive yourself. You did not ask to be abused. You did not know that the relationship would end up the way that it did. You did not know that your partner would slowly become a monster wearing his mask, nor did you ever want to be in that position in the first place. No one wants to be abused, and it is incredibly easy to overlook those early warning signs, reminding yourself that you love your partner and that it must have been a one time deal. You tell yourself that it will not happen again, and then you find yourself trapped in the cycle of abuse. Nevertheless, you have committed to living a better life. You have left the relationship, and that says that you are committed to bettering yourself. Let go of the guilt that you have been feeling toward yourself, and forgive yourself once and for all. You are not disregarding or forgetting the abuse— you are simply choosing to no longer let it rule your life. You are acknowledging that you did not deserve it. You are acknowledging that you did not ask for it. You are acknowledging that your ex was the one with the problem. Above all, you are acknowledging that you have broken free and making a promise to yourself that it will never happen again. Reclaim Your Narrative When you were in the midst of your relationship, you likely found that your relationship and your ex were constantly changing the narrative that you lived by. Not only were you constantly being told that you were wrong about what was happening, but you were likely also blamed for the abuse that you endured on a regular basis. You may have been told that you were to blame when the abuser lost his or her cool. You may have been told that you are a magnet for the abuse. You may have been told that whatever happened was not abusive. Now is the time to reclaim that narrative. No longer do you have to live by the abuser’s doctrine. You can determine what has happened for yourself and make sure that you tell yourself the truth. You are no longer bound to do whatever the abuser has told you to do. You no longer have to make it a point to agree with the abuser just to make sure that you do not suffer further. When you finally reclaim the narrative, you are able to define what has actually happened. You get to tell the story from your own perspective, acknowledging that you were abused and that you never deserved it. You can point out all the ways that your ex tried to force you to give in to the narrative that the abuser tried to tell everyone, and you can finally tell other people the truth. When you reclaim your story, you are effectively taking back the power. You are telling yourself that the abuser no longer has that control over you. You are making it clear that your life’s story is your own and that what happened was horrendous, but you are able to protect yourself further. You can correct the record. You are rejecting the abuser’s attempt to keep you silent, and you are rejecting the constant gaslighting. This is perhaps the most personal of the steps toward emotional recovery— you are acknowledging what has happened for what it is. You are choosing to make it clear to yourself, and to anyone that you choose to share it with, that you did not deserve what happened. Remember that this is your own story, and you do not have to share it if you chose not to. While some people find it empowering to share that story with others, you may choose to keep it to yourself, and that is okay. Seek Professional Help There are very few people in this world that would not benefit from some sort of guidance from a licensed psychologist at one point or another in their life. If you have been suffering from abuse, you may find that getting this help is actually imperative to your healing. When you get help from someone else, you are able to be given the coping mechanisms that you will need to truly begin to heal from abuse. There is nothing inherently wrong with seeing a therapist, though there is still quite the stigma around it. You are not going out of your way to find a crutch, and you are not necessarily seeking out medication. However, what you are doing is figuring out how to move forward in life and heal. Would you judge someone with a giant gash on their arm for going to the doctor for stitches? Would you tell someone with a broken foot to walk it off and stop being such a wimp? Probably not—and you should look at a mental health issue in the same way. If you have just escaped an emotionally abusive relationship, there is no doubt about it—you likely have emotional injuries. These wounds cannot begin to heal until you clean them out, and therapy can provide the skills necessary to do exactly that. You can learn how to better cope with your emotions, how to undo the emotional damage, and how to begin to better yourself. All of this comes together, and you can begin to heal once and for all. There are several different types of therapy that you can try in order to heal yourself. You may choose to seek out a therapist that is of the same religion as you. You may choose to investigate traditional psychotherapy, in which you talk over your feelings and thought processes over an extended period of time to try to come to some sort of resolution. You may choose to try Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR), a type of therapy that is commonly used to help veterans with their PTSD over a relatively short period of time. A commonly used therapy that you may find beneficial is cognitive behavioral therapy. This is a therapy that seeks to combine the best of cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy into a form of treatment that addresses both your thoughts and your behaviors to help you heal. Within this therapy type, you will be given several different tools to help you identify, restructure, and change your ways of thinking in order to directly influence your behaviors. This works through acknowledging the cycle of thoughts, influencing your feelings, which influence your behaviors. When you change just one in that cycle, you are able to create a domino effect that changes it all. Through providing actionable coping mechanisms, such as creating affirmations, learning the process of cognitive restructuring, and other similar tools, you will be prepared to handle nearly any problem with the tools provided. This means that you will not only be able to finally address your own trauma associated with the abusive relationship; you will also begin to heal whatever made you vulnerable to that abuse in the first place. You will learn how to prevent yourself from becoming a victim in the future. You will learn to be the best you can be. Chapter 5: The Narcissistic Abuser Addressing the emotional abuser is always a struggle, but at the very least, the emotional abuser is usually aware of his actions. The narcissistic abuser, on the other hand, can sometimes be even more persistent, more dangerous, and more insidious than the emotional abuser. The narcissist is driven to abuse by a personality disorder, whereas the emotional abuser may not be, and that is one of the major differences there Emotional abusers tend to abuse because they want to be powerful. They abuse because they want to be strong. They abuse because they want control. The narcissistic abuser, on the other hand, is different. The narcissistic abuser is driven by personality shortcomings and simply not being able to help himself. He cannot help the fact that he has a tendency to abuse, and even worse, his personality type prevents him from ever acknowledging that he may have been the root of the problem all along. Narcissistic individuals are incredibly needy. They demand attention and conformity at all times, and the mere notion that they may not get what they had originally wanted. What is interesting is that narcissistic abuse tends to follow the exact same patterns, no matter where you go. It may even seem that people that are subject to narcissistic abuse feel like everyone has read the same books. Two people who have suffered at the hands of two separate narcissists can almost always come together and nod sagely as they listen to what the other has to say about their experience. While emotional abusers are capable of change, and people of all kinds can show signs of emotional abuse at some time, such as yelling at someone to shut up in the heat of the moment, the narcissist does not. The narcissist is someone that can never change due to their personality type. They are disordered by nature—that is to say that they never think about the world in the way that an ordinary person would. There is too much lacking in the narcissistic personality type to allow for meaningful change or even the acknowledgment that the narcissist’s victim was even human enough to matter. At the end of the day, the emotional abuser is, at the very least a real person. As you are about to see, the narcissist is not. The narcissist hides behind a mask that is used to shield his true self from ever seeing the light of day, and this can add a whole new level of struggle to recovering from the emotional abuse that the narcissist naturally emanates. He does not mean to do this—it comes naturally to him. However, knowing that it was a natural intention of a disordered individual, little more than a delusional attempt to draw the victim in, does nothing for the victim in terms of healing. In fact, learning that the individual that the victim loved and knew was a lie all along can be particularly traumatizing on its own. Within this chapter, we will walk through what narcissistic personality disorder entails in order to get a complete understanding of what it is. We will look at how the narcissist tends to present himself to the world, particularly looking at the difference between the covert, over, and malignant narcissists and how they all interact with each other. We will take the time to go over what it is that the narcissist looks for in a target, and finally, we will begin to unpack the unmitigated disaster of disorganization that is the narcissist’s mind and abuse. Narcissistic Personality Disorder Narcissistic personality disorder is named for the myth of Narcissus, who was said to fall in love with his own reflection after having rejected the advances of a young nymph named Echo. She was so devastated by his rejection that she faded away, giving us the source of the echo that you would hear if you were to yell something in the mountains. This gives most people the impression that the narcissist is someone vain and self loving, but not particularly dangerous. Narcissistic tendencies can be seen in annoying characters in media, for example, who dote needlessly over their own image. However, there is far more to NPD than simply admiring one’s reflection. Those suffering from NPD typically present with several traits that come together to create someone that lacks empathy strongly considers his or her own self more important than others and typically requires a constant and excessive need of admiration to feel validated and like he matters. He is not comfortable in his own skin unless he is able to gain the attention and admiration from others. NPD is known as a cluster B personality disorder—these are disorders that directly impact one’s ability to interact socially and is found alongside those with histrionic personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, and antisocial personality disorder. All four of these types of disorders are particularly known for their dramatics and unpredictability. In particular, they are usually quite emotional and difficult to manage, and because the very way that they see the world has been so incredibly skewed, they struggle to ever actually recognize that they may actually have some sort of problem. With NPD in particular, you will see several symptoms, of which five must be present to be clinically diagnosable. These symptoms must arise in several different contexts over several different times, showing that they are pervasive in both recurrence and situation. The symptoms in particular that you can expect the clinically diagnosed narcissist to show include: a grandiose sense of self importance, self esteem that must be validated by the actions of other people, exploitative behavior, hurtful behavior, a lack of empathy, a focus on power and success, the assumption of being unique, a sense of entitlement, and a fixation with perfection. perfection Obsession S with Exploit ative Lack of empathy Fixated on fantasies of power Needfor Delusion of admiration uniqueness NPD exists with people who assume that they are perfect, with delusions on how they deserve respect and power, and they then go out of their way to exploit others to get that power. They are entirely convinced that they are entitled to anything and everything that they want because they are so unique and perfect. They feel like no one around them can possibly relate to who they are or understand the struggles of being as incredibly high class as the narcissist, and because of that, they typically spend as little time as possible with people that they deem to be beneath them. They would rather only associate with people that they see as their equals, meaning that anyone beneath them is only meant to be used and abused. The Narcissist What makes the narcissist so incredibly dangerous then, is the fact that the narcissist is not interested in interacting with other people unless they are his equal. Any relationships that he fosters will either be with people that he, himself, admires, or that he feels like he can use in some way. Effectively, either way has the same result—he is able to gain something out of his relationship. He sees the relationship as purely a stepping stone, drawing from traditional Machiavellian logic, but unlike the Machiavellian, the narcissist is likely to make mistakes. The narcissist believes that because he is so perfect and always right, that he does not have to be as careful as the other people. While still meticulous, he is going to ultimately do what he wants, when he wants, because he feels like he is entitled to doing exactly that. He would prefer to be able to act in ways that he sees to be beneficial to him. He wants to use people to his own enjoyment or to fill his excessive need for attention, something known as the narcissistic supply. At the end of the day, the narcissist will seek out valid forms of supply from other people, and depending on the type of narcissist that you are dealing with, you may see very different iterations of how they will go out of their way to get what they want. The overt narcissist is the one that everyone thinks of—he is grand and loud, demanding, and expectant. He feels that he is entitled to anything that he may want, and he will get it in any way necessary to ensure that he is satisfied. This is the one who believes that he is the best gift to mankind, even if everyone is just barely tolerant of him as an individual. He does not care about whether or not he is liked—all that matters to him is his success and the admiration that he wants. The covert narcissist is almost the exact opposite in many ways—the covert narcissist wants to be legitimately liked. He genuinely wants to be the best that there is, rather than simply believing that he is, but he struggles with his own emotional regulation. While the grandiose narcissist knows that he is the best, the covert narcissist needs that validation from other people in order to get it. The covert narcissist’s self esteem is entirely dependent upon how other people around him see him at that moment, and if he is not being showered in attention, he feels unworthy and will oftentimes play the victim role in order to get that attention that he desires. Finally, the malignant narcissist is the scariest of them all. Unlike the other two, who simply want to be validated and admired, the malignant narcissist just wants attention. He is typically quite sadistic as well, meaning that he enjoys watching other people suffer in misery. This means that he may find great joy out of intentionally setting up situations that will end in disasters, just to watch it all play out. He enjoys hurting people just for fun, intentionally making relationships fall apart, taking challenges such as convincing someone to fall head over heels in love with him before discarding them like garbage, and more. All he cares about is enjoying himself in any way. Recognizing the narcissist, no matter what the form, can generally be quite difficult for one reason: The narcissist’s personality is constantly changing. If you have ever seen a narcissist go from person to person, it can be incredibly eerie just how differently the interactions become from person to person. The narcissist may be a fun sports loving personality with one person, only to shift into reserved and analytical with the next. The finesse with which he can shift personalities with ease is incredibly daunting. However, this is what makes his abuse particularly painful to tolerate. The Narcissist’s Target Before discussing the methods of abuse, however, it is imperative that you understand the various personality types that become the narcissist’s preferred targets. Just as the narcissist has a set type of behaviors that seem to occur no matter who the narcissist is, they all tend to share an incredibly similar personality preference for their long term victims. The victims that are going to be pursued for long term relationships are ones that are going to e relatively easy to subdue. Narcissists are particularly lazy when it comes to their relationships with other people, and because of that, they will choose the path of least resistance wherever possible. They will intentionally decide to work toward a relationship with someone who they think will be easy to manage just so they always shave easy access to the narcissistic supply that they desire. In particular, there seem to be five distinct personality traits that attract the narcissist, and the best way to sum them all up into one word would be to call the target codependent. While the target may not always be codependent, they will show several signs of codependency and have enough of the features that the narcissist will not have to work too hard. The traits that the narcissist seems to favor most of all are people that are empathetic, who has had a rocky upbringing, are caregivers by nature, are conflict avoidant, have low self esteem, and are naturally people pleasers. These five traits come together to create a person that is well suited to tend to the narcissist’s every whim and need. Dysfunctional upbringing The NMarcissist’s Prey An empathetic individual is going to be able to relate to the narcissist or think that he or she can, and in relating, the empathetic individual will feel more inclined to help. They will want to help the narcissist, seeing someone that is broken, but who can be fixed with compassion and care. The empathy of the individual typically goes hand in hand with the caregiver nature of the narcissist’s target. Because they want to help other people at any cost, they will diligently put in the time and effort to tending to the narcissist’s needs. This leads the narcissist to getting that supply fix that he wanted, even though over time, it becomes too much for the empathetic one to take. By ensuring that the natural target of the narcissist is also conflict avoidant after having grown up in dysfunction, the narcissist is able to net a target that is far less likely to notice the red flags in their relationship. Abusive tendencies, such as emotional manipulation, will not seem as alarming when the individual that is being manipulated has grown up around similar abuse. Effectively, the empathetic target has never built up a solid boundary between abuse and a healthy relationship, and because of that, met with the fact that the target is likely a people pleaser that wants to avoid conflict, the target will simply take the abuse without a word. Targets like this are commonly deemed codependent—a term that implies that they are enabling the narcissist’s abusive tendencies. The codependent is effectively the opposite of the narcissist: He or she will have a need to feel needed, in perfect contrast to the narcissist’s need for admiration. If the narcissist wants to feel wanted and the codependent wants to feel needed, you would think that the two are a natural match made in heaven. However, there is one particular problem with this match—the narcissist will continue to take until the codependent eventually burns out. The codependent is so entirely dependent upon the relationship for any sort of validation in life that she may not realize just how much she is giving up, or recognize that the harm being done is truly problematic. The narcissist should not be able to override any and all needs for the codependent, and yet that is exactly what happens. The codependent’s need for feeling like she is helping other people then prevents her from ever actually taking care of herself. The codependent tends to be someone who has already grown up with his or her needs being marginalized in favor of someone else—this means that she is not likely to care or notice much about her own needs being forgone in favor of the narcissist. She will simply see it as life as usual and continue on her way without a second thought. While the codependent and the narcissist absolutely do meet those needs for each other, this is perhaps one of the more toxic combinations of personality types—the narcissist is effectively enabled, allowing for further justification of the abuse and control that he feels the need to exhibit. The codependent continues to define her own self worth as being entirely dependent upon the narcissist’s need of her. In the end, the two bring out the worst for each other by meeting their most desired need in a way that is harmful for all involved. They become a toxic relationship, in which they are both incredibly dangerous toward each other. These relationships rarely actually pan out particularly well as they end in burnout and further abuse. Identifying Narcissistic Abusers Narcissistic abuse harms everyone involved, and because it is so incredibly harmful to people, it is imperative that you understand what to look for in order to know what to avoid. Narcissistic abusers, however, are notoriously difficult to identify. Because they are commonly able to shift from personality to personality, changing their presented personas more often than teenage girls change their outfits, it can be incredibly difficult to keep track of who is the narcissist and what they look like. Thankfully, there is a method that you can use to identify the narcissistic abuser once you have had some time to interact with the other person. Because narcissists can be so incredibly persistent and are so dangerous and difficult to deal with as the mask comes off, avoidance is usually the best policy, but it is not always easy to avoid someone if you do not know what you are doing. Because of this, it is important that you learn to identify the narcissist early on. In learning to identify the narcissist, the next time you believe that someone may be one, you can instead choose to avoid them altogether instead of attempting to interact with them. The method that you will be using to identify the narcissist involves three simple steps—you will look at how they talk to you, you will look at how what they say makes you feel, and then you will identify how they are behaving. Each of these steps, if you spend the time to look at each, will help provide that valuable insight into whether or not they are a narcissist or other incredibly negative personality What they do What they say When you are paying attention to what the narcissist has to say, you are going to be looking for words that either come across as far too positive or far too negative. Either end of the spectrum bodes ill for the individual’s status as a stable individual. If you hear strongly positive words, you may be showered in affection and praise—however, this praise will be far more than is considered normal. It will err on the side of excessive, such as telling the victim that they are the center of the narcissist’s universe, or that the narcissist promises to make the victim his queen. This excessively positive, lavish speech is a warning to you that he is building you up. While it is normal to hear words of affection and admiration from a partner, if they can go on and on about how loved you are, they may simply be trying to win you over for their own gain. This is known as love bombing and will be discussed further in the narcissist’s tactics. On the other hand, strongly negative words imply that the individual is quite negative—they may talk down about other people around them, or point out that their boss is a terrible person. They act as though they are better than everyone that they are discussing. This should be treated as a red flag—if you were ever to stand up against the narcissist, you would be lumped into this category as well. Sometimes, the words of the narcissist show that there is no empathy involved—they will talk and act like you are not there, or respond to your own struggles. If they seem entirely impervious to emotions or relating to you when you talk about having a tough time, you are likely to struggle in future interactions and conversations. Finally, one last common tactic of the narcissist’s words is to use words that paint them as a victim—while the narcissist is convinced that he is superior to all, he will also inevitably suffer from what is referred to as a narcissistic injury—this is when the narcissist’s idea of perfection is challenged in some way, such as the narcissist not getting that promotion he was gunning for. When this happens, they are suddenly the victim—they will make it sound like it was an intentional slight rather than something that was decided upon because the person who was hired was actually competent and deserving. What you feel After having spent the time to listen to their words, you want to know how they make you feel as well. This will involve you identifying how you tend to feel when exposed to the other party, such as wondering if you happen to feel normal. Sometimes, the narcissist will intentionally make you feel either incredibly positively or incredibly negatively—usually, it will oscillate between the two. What is incredibly common, however, is the feeling of a lack of control. In the presence of the narcissist, the narcissist controls it all. They choose what they do, how they do it, and how you will feel. They will micromanage everything in order to get their own desired results, and if you attempt to fight them on it, they will do everything in their power to make you as miserable as possible. This is because they feel like they deserve to be right and respected—they want to be in utter control of everything around them. When you realize that you often feel like you are floating on cloud 9, you may be in the presence of a narcissist. While it is great that you feel so good, it is also worth wondering if the endless flattery and affection that you are getting is designed to hurt you. Sometimes, it is legitimate, but far more often, it is malicious and deliberate in order to control you. On the other hand, if you find that you regularly feel like you are not good enough or like nothing you do will ever be good enough, it may be time to wonder if the other person is a narcissist. They will often spend so much time talking about themselves, their own achievements, and how they would like to reach their own goals, they usually unintentionally put you down instead. They compare you and them without thinking about it—but the narcissist thinks he is the greatest gift on earth, so of course, he is going to sing himself high praises while simultaneously brushing you off as mediocre at best. What they do Finally, you want to figure out the narcissist’s behavioral habits as well. The narcissist is rarely ever actually considerate of the time of anyone other than the people that the narcissist believes are his equals or superiors. Anyone else can wait, and it does not matter how annoyed the other person is. They will usually end up quite insensitive and rude, but if you ever try to call out the behaviors, you get shrugged off like it does not matter. This is the nature of the narcissist—he does not care about other people. He will make a quick excuse or will attack you if you try to call him out, as narcissists tend to be particularly volatile when they are interacting with someone else, and they will then blow off their responsibility. They will find some way to be the victim, whether because you so rudely accused them or because they do not care about what they have done and how it impacts others. At the end of the day, if you find that the person seems to behave like a narcissist, using extreme words, triggering extreme feelings, and constantly quick to anger and willing to deflect blame, you may find that you are better off running in the other direction as quickly as possible. While it may be tempting when you see how charming that the narcissist comes off as, or when you hear the flattery that the narcissist gives you, remember that it is never worth the hassle, and you are generally better off giving up and avoiding the situation altogether. You will be happier without wasting your time trying to keep up with the mind games. Chapter 6: Narcissistic Abuse Finally, with that image in mind of how the narcissist presents himself and why the narcissist does what he does, you will be able to better understand the abuse that the narcissist is willing to inflict on other people. It will become important for you to recognize not only the warning signs of narcissistic abuse, which are a bit different than those reserved for emotional abuse, but also make sure that you are able to recognize several of the most common narcissistic abuse tendencies. This chapter will focus solely on teaching you about narcissistic abuse. You will be given guides to what the abuse is, how it works, why it is harmful, and why it is favored. More about fighting the narcissist’s abuse will happen in Chapter 8: Disarming the narcissist, in which you will be given several strategies for countering the narcissist in the moment in order to avoid allowing the narcissist to walk all over you any longer than he will otherwise try. With the successful understanding of these methods of abuse, you will be able to recognize when the abuse is occurring, allowing you to combat it if you have found yourself in a situation in which you cannot simply cut off or avoid the narcissist, which will always be the easiest, most efficient method of avoiding the harm that comes along with them. Signs of Narcissistic Abuse Narcissistic abuse is particularly insidious. It is designed to control and coerce, much like many of the emotional manipulation tactics, but beyond that, narcissistic abuse is powerful because oftentimes, the narcissist is not even aware of the abuse as it occurs. They simply go about their lives without self awareness or social awareness to understand what they are doing or how it impacts others. They are effectively slaves to their emotions, making them particularly dangerous. If you are constantly giving in to your emotional state, you are likely going to be making some particularly dangerous decisions that can absolutely ruin your chances of success as you wish to see it. When you are being exposed to narcissistic abuse, you will feel like your whole world has been turned upside down. It will be like nothing makes sense anymore, and like you cannot tell right from wrong. Imagine that you have just been spun over and over again until you are dizzy, and then you are thrown into the water with a blindfold. How do you figure out which way is up or down if you cannot touch the bottom of the water? The answer is, you can’t. The same thing happens with narcissistic abuse. Without guidance and understanding the signs of abuse, you can feel like that person in the water without any visual input or sensory input to help guide them to the surface. Of course, if they mistakenly swim downward instead of upwards, there may be some serious problems that could be fatal. While narcissistic abuse is not particularly likely to kill you, as it is primarily psychological in nature, it can leave you doubting yourself, your reality, and everything that you know. In particular, when you want to identify that you are actively being victimized by narcissistic abuse, it will once again be time for self reflection. While narcissistic abuse itself can get tricky to identify, the signs of the abuse in the victim are much more prominent, and if you know what you are looking for and can identify them, you can say quite confidently that you have been victimized by emotional or narcissistic abuse. As before, you will need to think about yourself as you go through this section. See how much of the signs of emotional predation from the narcissist seem to resonate with you, and if you find that you can strongly relate to the signs being provided, it is time to begin looking long and hard at your relationships to find the narcissist hiding in human clothing. Dissociation and Narcissistic Abuse One such symptom of narcissistic abuse is the experience of dissociation. This is effectively your mind’s way of separating the abuse from yourself— you will feel emotionally, and sometimes even physically detached from your body and mind. This is essentially the experience of a traumatic event —your mind tries to cope by separating away from the abuse and trauma in order to survive, or at the very least to no longer suffer. It is common knowledge that prey animals will suddenly freeze and stop moving when they are hunted and caught—this is likely quite similar in response. They freeze and dissociate so they do not suffer, and in doing so, they are detached from what has happened. When you have this happen to yourself, you may find that you are largely numb as an individual. Your emotions do not seem so important or meaningful to you anymore, and instead, you feel nothing at all. Of course, this is no way to live your life. You should be able to enjoy your life, which means you must be able to get rid of the traumatic aspect. Unmet Needs Another common sign that you are suffering from narcissistic abuse is that you lack the ability to meet your needs, or you chose not to. If you find that you have several unmet needs and wants building up, you may want to consider if these are unmet simply because you have not had time or resources, or because you have instead chosen to stop attempting to achieve what you have always wanted in favor of making sure that you cater to a narcissist in your life. Your Physical Health is Failing The mind and body are closely linked, and if you are suffering from anxiety or depression as a direct result of the narcissistic abuse that you have been enduring, you may find that your body itself may begin to get sick as well. Your body is effectively being flooded with stress hormones from the constant turmoil, and that constant stress leads to your body wearing down as well. That stress puts unnecessary wear on your heart and keeps you from sleeping, which wears down your immune system as well. If you find that you may be getting sicker more often than you used to, it is possible that a narcissist is to blame, especially in tandem with several other of the symptoms within this section. If you are getting sicker, do not try to brush it off as unrelated—your mind and body work together, and just because the narcissist may never lay a hand on you, his abuse can still cause significant physical harm. You Distrust Everyone As your body fails you and you find that you are largely miserable most of the time, you may also realize that along with the numbness comes this sense of not being able to trust others—you feel like you cannot trust that other people will not also be trying to hurt and abuse you, especially after coming to the conclusion that you are being abused in the first place. Knowing that someone that you loved was actually a monster in disguise can be incredibly earth shattering for the individual going through it. Effectively, you are not only dealing with the fact that you were lied to and abused, but you are also suddenly mourning the loss of a person that you thought you knew that never existed in the first place. That is particularly traumatic, and if you do not address that trauma, you are likely going to continue to struggle with trusting other people. You Protect the Narcissist Without Knowing Why And the fact that you do it may drive you insane. You do not know why you are protecting the narcissist, but it feels natural. This is because those in abusive relationships tend to rationalize, minimize, and then deny the abuse that was endured. Though you may be cognitively aware of the abuse that you are enduring, you must also recognize that the abuse is also leading you to protect the abuser. It is incredibly common for abuse victims to tell themselves that the abuse and abuser are not so bad—it is the only way that they can cope with the abuse as it occurs. If they admitted that the abuse was as bad as it truly was, they would be stuck with the cognitive dissonance of not getting out when they need to as they continue to be abused. It becomes easier for the mind to simply push away the abuse and pretend that it was not as bad as it actually was. However, think about the implication there—if you are minimizing the abuse, you are delegitimizing your own experience. You are saying that you are okay taking the abuse because it was not abusive in the first place. You are effectively burying your head and pretending that everything is fine because you cannot see what is happening, though it is clearly happening, and you are, at least to some degree, fully aware of it. Ask yourself, though, if you would tell your son or daughter to do what you are doing. If it were your child in your position, would you encourage your child that the abuse was not so bad or would you tell your child to break free and enjoy life? When you must identify whether or not you have been enduring the abuse of the narcissist, you are going to want to consider each of the previously listed traits. Do you feel an incessant need to protect the narcissist? Do you feel like the abuse is not actually as bad? Do you find that your health is worsening, or that you are living with constant anxiety? Are you simply numb constantly in between those bursts of numbness? This is a particularly painful realization to come to, knowing that you have been victimized, but it is so incredibly important. You need to be able to acknowledge if you have been hurt so you can prioritize healing. In knowing that you have been abused, you can start making an effort to prevent it from happening again in the future. You will be able to fight back, cleaning up your life, and finding the best way to work toward the life that you know that you deserve. You will be able to achieve that life with ease if you give yourself the time to do so. Now, it is time to delve into the narcissist’s favorite tactics to use and abuse other people. As you continue reading from this point on, you will gain special insight into what and why the narcissist does what he does. In particular, we are addressing some of the most prevalent manipulation tactics that the narcissist will make a part of his own toolkit. You will be walked through mirroring—the art of the narcissist changing who he presents himself as in order to win favor. You will then see how the narcissist is able to keep those relationships with love bombing and devaluation. You will look at gaslighting, the art of convincing people of things that are not actually true. You will see projection and how the narcissist loves to deflect his own flaws onto other people. You will see how the narcissist is able to so expertly reverse roles and somehow always end up as the victim—but only the best victim that has had it way worse than anyone else in the history of victimhood. Mirroring and the Narcissist You may have heard the term mirroring before—usually, it is used in the context of discussing neuro linguistic programming. However, here, we are talking about an entirely different type of mirroring. The narcissist has a special kind of mirroring, during which he is able to project exactly which personality he thinks will be necessary to win favor from the person that is meant to be manipulated one way or the other. When the narcissist is going to be mirroring someone, he first focuses on who his target is. Let’s say that we have our narcissist, Ned, and his target, a young woman named Talia. Ned sees Talia and immediately decides that she will be his next target. He goes over to her, the perfect picture of charisma and charm, and begins to talk. He makes a quick judgment call— based on her clothing, she is into country lifestyles, and he discusses how he has been dying to go horseback riding. It turns out that his guess was exactly right. She begins to talk about how she used to go with her late fiancé and discusses how her fiancé had been the kindest, gentlest soul she had ever seen. He then decides that what she needs is someone kind and gentle. Ned is constantly feeding off of the cues that Talia is giving, putting together the perfect picture of what she seems to want and need. He appears to be sensitive and interested in listening, despite the fact that he does not actually care about her or what she is saying—he pays only enough attention to make sure that he has enough information to use later on. Effectively, then, Ned will create a persona—a sort of mast that he uses to present himself to Talia, over the course of the introduction and interaction. He figures out what she wants, becomes that person, and executes it perfectly. He will wear this mask for a while—he wants her to become attracted to him and be interested in more. Love Bombing and the Narcissist With Talia officially hooked, Ned moves on to his next tactic—love bombing. This works entirely by Ned showering her with the lavish praise and attention that has been discussed as being too good to be true—because it is. He is doing this for a very specific reason. People are quite motivated by very specific factors in life, and one such factor is whether they have created a positive association between whatever it is that has their attention and what they will be doing. In this case, Ned wants Talia to put together a positive association with spending time with him. He wants her to feel like he is the greatest person ever, and he will do whatever he can in order to continue to win her over. With the constant showering of praise, pushing the relationship to move quicker, and the façade of being the perfect man for her, he is able to effectively convince her to fall in love. All it took was a few gifts, plenty of kind words, and learning a bit about her. At this point, he wants to facilitate her to fall in love with her as quickly as possible, and he will continue to ride on the honeymoon period for a while. After some time, though, as the newness of the intense relationship begins to fade away, he begins to let his mask slip a bit. He stops being perfect for her all the time—after all, he believes that his true self is perfect. He may even use what is known as devaluing—he will effectively suddenly and unexpectedly knock her off of the pedestal she has become accustomed to. In knocking her off, she will effectively be left to scramble desperately to reclaim her position. She will try as hard as she can to get back to that spot, meaning she will do anything that he asks in order to regain favor. This is because the good feelings of the love bomb stage are intoxicating. They feel good and addictive, and as soon as you no longer have them, you desperately crave them once more. You will do whatever you can in order to reclaim that love and attention, as Talia has done. As soon as she does win his favor back, she feels more comfortable in her position again. However, Ned will repeat this cycle over and over again at varying lengths, all because he wants to make her feel unstable. In feeling unstable, she cannot accurately predict what will happen next. She will constantly be scrambling to remain on his good side, meaning that he has someone that is always at attention to give him whatever it is that he wants at that moment. Love bombing Victim scranblesto get back to Status quo Stable love and affection Beginning to grow indifferent Devaluing event Gaslighting and the Narcissist Beyond the cycle of convincing someone to fall in love with him, however, Ned has all sorts of other tactics up his sleeve. One such tactic is gaslighting —when you use gaslighting, you are effectively convincing the other person that they are insane. This is particularly heinous when used by the narcissist for one reason: He believes his gaslighting wholeheartedly. Most of the time, the manipulator will intentionally gaslight, knowing that it is a lie because that lie will serve a purpose that is important. It is important to go through the effort because it is seen as necessary. However, the narcissist gaslights for a slightly different reason—his narrative is simply that distorted. Unlike the manipulator, the narcissist’s perception of reality is skewed—he believes that he is the best person around. He believes that he is absolutely entitled to anything that he asks for or strives to achieve. He believes that he does deserve to be recognized as superior. However, as the normal person looking in knows, these are nothing but delusions. These delusions are incredibly powerful, however, and the narcissist believes them wholeheartedly. When he uses gaslighting, then reciting his narrative of what he believes has happened, he believes what he is saying. He believes that he is the victim because that distorted belief is better than the alternative, which would have been to acknowledge that he is not as perfect as he attempts to be. If he were to admit that, he would let go of everything integral to who he is, so instead, he convinces himself that his narrative is the right narrative. Of course, that then means that the narrative that everyone else gets is just as skewed. However, the narcissist’s narrative is harder to discern from the truth. With manipulators, you can usually pick up on signs of deception, but with the narcissist, they believe what they are saying. That makes this dangerous— they may entirely believe that the person that got the promotion did so in order to get back at the narcissist. They may believe that the person that broke up with them did it so they could sleep around and hurt the narcissist —so long as the narcissist is the victim within the gaslighting, the narcissist will continue to sing that narrative. Projection and the Narcissist As a sort of contrast to the act of mirroring, narcissists are also adept at projection as well. They will take their own traits and assign them to other people in accordance to whether they want to scapegoat out the other person or make them favored. In particular, you see this sort of behavioral tactic play out with narcissistic parents toward their children—the favored child will be referred to as the golden child for this section, and is the child that can do no wrong. The narcissist usually identifies very closely with the golden child and will allow the golden child to do anything. They see the golden child as the extension of all things good about themselves. The scapegoated child, however, is given all of the negatives. If the narcissist believes that he is, for example, someone with low self esteem, which some narcissists are, the scapegoat will be treated as a sort of effigy for all of that negativity. The narcissist will funnel all negativity about himself onto the scapegoat and take it out on him or her. If the scapegoat wants to have friends over, he is punished. If he wants new clothes, he is given hand me downs while his younger brother gets to go out and shop at the name brand stores. The scapegoat is effectively victimized and taught to take the abuse. If anything goes wrong, it is always the scapegoat’s fault, with no exceptions. This, of course, is an incredibly damaging dynamic. The golden child never learns consequences and usually winds up being quite narcissistic himself, while the scapegoat instead gets attacked with all of the negativity and taught to be quite codependent instead, as her needs are never met, and she is taught that she must always please the narcissist and the golden child. The scapegoat will be begging for any scraps of affection and kindness, which are only occasionally shown when the scapegoat has put the narcissist’s needs first. DARVO and the Narcissist The final tactic that we will discuss with the narcissist is his skilled ability to reverse nearly any argument or problem. Even if he is the attacker, he will find a way to spin things around if you are not familiar with his method known as DARVO. +f; ery: Standing for Deny, Attack, Reverse Victim, and Offender, DARVO is an incredibly powerful technique. If you do not know what you are looking for, it is next to impossible to accurately notice and evade. You need to be able to recognize that the narcissist is intentionally trying to derail the argument instead of actually making a good point. For example, let’s go back to Ned and Talia. Talia is crying because she feels like she was taken advantage of. She tells Ned that she is furious and that she wishes he had never bothered coming around because she would much rather have been able to grieve the loss of her fiancé without his negative presence. Ned, then, points out that she has always held her fiancé over his head and that she has always made him so incredibly pressured to try to live up to this dead man’s idealized image. He points out how difficult it is to win out over a man that is dead, gone, and will only ever be remembered fondly, and in response, he points out how she is even doing it right now. Let’s pause for a moment and consider what just happened—did Talia ever actually say anything about Ned not being good enough? No—she said that she wished that she had never put up with such a negative presence. She never compared the two and instead only made it a point to mention that she would have rather been able to avoid Ned and all of the narcissistic toxicity that he brought with him. However, Ned was able to spin it around, and suddenly, he was the poor victim that needed sympathy. He was the one who was made to feel not good enough, in his narrative. He was the one held to an impossible standard. Notice how he effectively flipped the narrative, all by denying what Talia had first said, then attacking her to put her on the defensive. With Talia on the defensive, she is going to be so busy attempting to protect herself that he is able to get away with the argument. He has completely distracted her from her initial anger and instead put her on guard, meaning he now has the complete advantage. This is the power of DARVO— it is an important tactic to remember because if you can identify it when it happens, you can effectively stop it from occurring. All you need to do is refuse to give in to the attempt to attack and reverse—for example, instead of taking the bait, Talia may mention that Ned’s description of things never happened and that his own feelings on what she was discussing are entirely irrelevant at that point in time as she was addressing something unrelated to her fiancé. She simply wanted to be given the freedom to grieve without interruption, and she felt like Ned had stolen that chance from her. Chapter 7: The Effects of Narcissistic Abuse Now, you have seen a bit about what the narcissist can do if they are given the in. You have seen how they are able to manipulate with ease, and how they have several tactics that can make them particularly dangerous when interacting with other people. However, so far, other than looking at a few of the signs of abuse within relationships, what has not been addressed and truly discussed is the impact that the abuse of the narcissist can really cause. Narcissistic abuse is different from traditional emotional abuse—that much has become glaringly obvious. However, the abuse that the narcissist uses seems to leave far deeper emotional scars. Perhaps related to the fact that the narcissist is able to betray the most sensitive, intimate parts of you— your heart. More often than not, the narcissist is able to convince you to believe in the existence of someone who never existed, convincing you to fall in love with someone who was little more than a figment of the narcissist’s imagination. Talia was so angry, not because of Ned himself, or because Ned was not good enough, but rather because Ned had lied. Ned had made her fall for someone that she thought would bring her happiness, and he did, for a short while. Of course, that happiness very quickly was destroyed altogether, leaving Talia reeling as she tried to cope with the sudden realization. Ultimately, some of the effects of narcissistic abuse can be worse in some ways than the abuse of emotional abusers, particularly because of the betrayal and demand for utter obedience from the narcissist. Within this chapter, we will go over five of the potential side effects of narcissistic abuse that many people in recovery must go through. We will take a look at echoism, the impact of narcissism on self confidence, the development of a codependent personality, common mental health issues that arise, and finally, post traumatic stress disorder, a very serious, very debilitating form of anxiety. As you read through this chapter after having come from an abusive relationship, do not be afraid, and do not let your feelings get the best of you—remember, you are going to be learning how to overcome these side effects. You are well on your way to healing if you have taken the effort to read this far into this book, and you will be able to succeed in healing. However, you must be aware of your injuries before you can treat them. As painful as it can be to stop and look at all of the ways that the narcissist in your life has hurt you, whether through damaging your self confidence, causing anxiety, or leading to echoism, you can heal. You can reclaim your life. Repeat that to yourself—you can and WILL reclaim your life, one step and one day at a time. Echoism The first significant impact that we will look at is echoism. If you are familiar with the myth of Narcissus, you know that a young nymph named Echo had fallen in love with Narcissus. He rejected her, and she faded away. Appalled at the rejection, Narcissus was punished, cursed to stare into a puddle of water at his reflection until he, too, died. All that remained of Echo after the rejection was her voice, a mere shadow of who she once was before Narcissus refused her. When we are talking about echoism with humans, then we are looking at how people tend to respond to narcissists and the abuse of narcissists. In particular, echoism is a trait—this trait, in particular, measuring as a fear of becoming a narcissist. The echoists, then, are afraid of their own needs. They are kind, but terrified by the possibility of burdening those around them. They wish to support others without acknowledgment and praise, preferring instead to remain in the background and blending in. They usually struggle with praise and attention, feeling like they cannot voice what they want, even if they know whatever that is. The echoist, then, is like the anti narcissist. While the narcissist needs attention, the echoist fears it. While the narcissist thrives on control and determining what will happen, the echoist would rather be told what to do. When the narcissist becomes abusive, the echoists blame themselves for the problem. Ultimately, then, the echoist is able to help other people meet their own needs, but struggles to ever acknowledge and meet their own. They are constantly hiding in the backdrop. While of course, some people have this personality type naturally, even without ever suffering at the hand of an abuser or narcissist, others develop it seemingly from their abuse. They grew aversive to needing their needs met, learning that any attention is uncomfortable because it means that the narcissist will be turning his greedy, jealous eyes on them soon after. It becomes easier when your life is overshadowed by a narcissist, to simply let it all pass you by while you hide in the background. Praise then gets dismissed as luck or saying that it was just really easy. However, anything negative is automatically the fault of the echoist. Typically, after so long of being made inferior and taught to help the narcissist rather than take care of themselves, the echoists become willing to just do exactly that. Similar to the codependent, they feel like their only purpose in life is to make sure that everyone else is cared for, and in doing so, they struggle. As needs pile up, completely unmet, they grow unhealthier. They find themselves miserable, and they often feel stuck. If you are afraid that you may be an echoist, do not fret—just as with all of the other negative aspects of discovering that you have been a victim of a narcissist, you can heal this one as well. Losing Self Confidence Another common side effect of a relationship with a narcissist is the loss of self confidence. Even the most confident person in the world will eventually be worn down around the narcissist without the proper protection, so if you happened to find that the narcissist destroyed what was once a confident individual, you are not alone. The narcissist’s tactics usually sneak by completely unnoticed unless you take the time to learn them, and if not, you may find your own self confidence waning. Self confidence is critical for people—it is how you learn to trust yourself to take care of yourself. When you are self confident, you trust that you are capable of doing the right thing, and you inherently trust your own decisions and judgments. You are certain that you will always be behaving in ways that are beneficial to you and you trust that you will be successful. Self confidence is not the same as grandiosity in the sense that the narcissist is grandiose—self confidence is usually healthy. It is good to be self confident, so long as your self confidence is accurate and warranted, taking time to acknowledge that you do, like everyone else around you, have certain weaknesses that must be accommodated for. Because the narcissist is so quick to tell people that they are less than the narcissist in any way possible, always downplaying any achievements, it is only natural that over time, that self confidence would wane. After hearing the narcissist tell you that you are stupid enough times, you will naturally internalize it, simply because people tend to be more susceptible to beliefs that they hear on repeat over and over again. The narcissist’s abuse eventually does this to your self confidence overall, leaving you a shell of your former glory. Becoming Codependent Codependency has already been touched upon within this book so far, and it will be addressed once more in a bit more depth here, as it is an important consequence of narcissistic abuse in several situations. When you are exposed to a narcissist, you are commonly given two choices: Give in or be abused. The narcissist will attempt to browbeat almost anyone into submission, and in the event that submission is impossible, the narcissist then rejects the other person under the guise of having wanted to do that all along. When you are browbeaten into submission threatened with being forced into submission, you very quickly learn to fear the narcissist. Especially if you were a child that grew up under a narcissistic parent, you may find that any time you had needs, they were always overshadowed and rejected altogether. You were not allowed to have needs without punishment, or having those needs barely met at all. Codependency eventually develops then when someone has been forced to give up their own needs in favor of other people’s over and over again on repeat until they no longer tried to meet those needs anymore. For example, imagine that you grew up with a narcissistic father and a codependent mother. You were likely constantly taught from a young age to put your father’s needs first. Your mother would feed your father first—specifically what he wanted. If you were crying because you had gotten hurt, but your father was going off on some tirade about something, your mother would attend to him. It was even so bad that the time that you fell and broke your arm, your mom stopped and fetched your father his dinner and beer before helping you, despite the fact that you were crying in pain. This sort of constant neglect eventually taught you that trying to meet your needs was pointless—they would never have been met anyway. You would not be able to get them met no matter how hard you tried, and the message that you internalized early on was not to have needs. They did not get met, so why bother wasting time thinking about them? You may have learned to forget about your hunger or thirst, until you would stand up and get dizzy, realizing that you had not eaten or had any water in a while. You would frequently forget to make sure that you dressed appropriately or that you were prepared for events and outings simply because you never had to bother with your own needs. Growing up or being forced into the shadow of a narcissist will cause people to become incredibly codependent. They will find that their self esteem drops, something closely related to the drop in self confidence. They will become people pleasing, feeling like they must take care of everyone else without complaint. They will struggle to create any sort of boundaries at all in relationships, believing that they are unimportant or should not be enforced. They identify closely with the caretaker, meaning that they must constantly be engaging with other people and taking care of them to find any real value in their lives. They must maintain some sort of control, whether on their own behaviors or feeling like they are in control of the narcissist, usually in the form of taking the blame for everything that happens. They are dependent upon the relationships that they are in, terrified of being rejected, and they will obsess over their relationships and the anxiety surrounding being rejected. Ultimately, the codependent becomes someone hardly capable of functioning in a healthy capacity in real relationships. Because the codependent is so set upon making sure that all needs are met without fail and making sure that they take the blame for any behavioral issues within the relationship, there is always an unhealthy dynamic in a codependent’s relationships, and for that reason alone, codependency must be defeated. Mental Health Issues Ultimately, narcissistic abuse causes mental health issues, as well. Aside from echoism and codependency, you can see very real, diagnosable disorders as well. The victims of abuse may go on to suffer from depression, and with that depression, they often feel like they will never be able to get out. The narcissistic relationship can be a constant drain on any healthy thoughts or hope within the individual, eventually resulting entirely in depression. The depression can be long lasting and pervasive as the victim finds themselves isolated, alone, and abused on a regular basis. Rather than being able to escape, they are stuck, alone, and with nothing but abuse to show for it. Anxiety is another common mental health issue that arises. The victim may find themselves feeling anxious at just the thought of the narcissist, or the displeasure that they are certain will be problematic in the future. They know that the narcissist is abusive and they fear that abuse. However, they also find themselves powerless to stop it. Instead, they find themselves constantly living in a state of heightened stress. Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a very specific side effect to the abuse that the narcissist tries to dish out. Those suffering from PTSD often struggle in life—even little things that are vaguely reminiscent of the narcissist can be enough to trigger the victim to find themselves in the midst of a panic attack, and that is something that no person wants to have to endure. Post traumatic stress disorder arises from the mind trying to cope with trauma. The exact cause is not yet known, though psychologists are leaning toward it being related to the brain’s ability to process memories. If the brain of the individual with PTSD is unable to properly process the memories, it is quite likely that the individual will then suffer further from the negative side effects. They will have recurring nightmares about the abuse or about the narcissist, or they will find that they are largely unable to protect themselves from any flashbacks that may arise in response to triggering stimuli. If you find that you are suffering from PTSD, you are going to want to speak to a doctor or other licensed medical professional. There is only so much advice that can be given through a book without being able to directly speak to the individual suffering from symptoms, so the best thing that you can do is to get a diagnosis from a proper medical professional and begin treatment with therapy and possibly medication. While you can attempt to treat the symptoms of PTSD at home, the management without guidance is not always effective. It can help, but if you want to truly find relief, you are going to want to make sure that you have that guidance and personalized advice that you can only get in a one on one interaction. Chapter 8: Disarming the Narcissist Narcissists are notoriously difficult to get rid of, even if you try. More often than not, if you want to get the narcissist to go away, you need to figure out how to do it in a way that makes them think that going away was their idea altogether. You want them to believe that they were in control, so they do not take your attempt to avoid them as a way of subverting their perceived control over the situation. Remember, the narcissist is convinced wholeheartedly that he or she is entirely responsible for everything. They believe that they control everyone around them, struggling to see anyone else as a legitimate human being deserving of respect or care. When you find yourself stuck interacting with a narcissist and trying to get rid of them, or at the very least, removing their ability to hurt you, there are several tactics that you can use that have not yet been discussed within the scope of this book. You can make it a point to cut off the narcissist and disappear completely, potentially moving somewhere that the narcissist will never be able to find you, but that is not always practical or possible. For that reason, this chapter will guide you through five ways to remove power from the narcissist. Of course, the most effective way to disarm the narcissist is to avoid contact completely, and this will be the first topic discussed. Depending on the relationships with the narcissist, you may be in a position in which you can cut them off altogether, and allow yourself the space you need. Beyond that, there are techniques such as being able to set up a boundary that is enforced, or becoming what is commonly called the “grey rock” in order to make the narcissist think that you are boring. What is consistent no matter what the method you choose, however, is to make sure that you are firm in whatever you choose. If you cut off, you must stay cut off. If you are willing to take advantage of boundaries, you must always enforce them and the consequences of not respecting those boundaries. If you are to relent on your attempts to manage the narcissist, even just slightly, you will encourage the narcissist—the narcissist will be aware of the discovered weakness, and that means that the narcissist will be able to take advantage in the future, as well as encourage future attempts as well. As you read through these methods, keep in mind that you will want to make sure that whatever you choose works for you. Narcissists are not a one size fits all situation, and you will have to figure out exactly how will work best for the narcissist in your life. Some are relatively trainable—with some reinforcement and constant use of boundaries, you may be able to maintain some sort of a distant relationship with them. In other instances, you may be best served by cutting your losses and moving on. Cut Off Contact Completely The first tactic is by far the most effective, but it is not always practical. If you are able to cut off the narcissist, please do so. You will find that, after the initial extinction burst, life becomes far more peaceful. You will be so much happier without the narcissist controlling your life and making it impossible for you to find enjoyment in anything. If you will be cutting off the narcissist completely, you can do so by stating your boundary, such as saying that you are no longer interested in a relationship and asking that the narcissist does not contact you again. From there, you simply ignore any attempts to contact you. If they show up to your house, you can call the police and have them told to leave or risk trespassing charges. If you find that they are particularly persistent, you can always try moving, changing your number, and moving on, especially if they live rather close to you. If they are long distance, just blocking numbers may be enough, though they may try to show up again at some point in the future. When you are cutting off a narcissist, you are likely to be met with resistance—after all, the narcissist will not be ignored on anyone else’s terms, or at least that is what he thinks. You may receive phone calls from family members, asking how you could be so cruel as to cut off poor Grandpa Frank, never mind the fact that he has been abusive for the last several years. What matters here more than anything, however, is that you must remain firm. If you ever give in to the demand for contact, you have rewarded the narcissist. You have taught the narcissist that if they push you exactly that much, they can get you to relent, and they will use that tactic again in the future. Just as a toddler throwing a temper tantrum should never be rewarded, you want to keep your distance from the narcissist as well. Keep in mind that if you cut off, you are going to expect what is known as an extinction burst—this is essentially how the narcissist will behave in response to the fact that you have suddenly stopped rewarding his attempts to control you, as you always have. You are suddenly working in a way that is not normal, and that does not compute to his mind. Think of how if you were to go outside, only to find that your car did not start, you would try again and again, growing increasingly more frantic for a few minutes as you desperately tried to crank the car. After a few minutes, you would probably give up and call the mechanic. However, the narcissist will not—he will repeatedly crank and crank and crank until something gives. Remember, the narcissist is rarely able to see the world rationally and is more likely to be guided by his own skewed and distorted worldview than anything else. In this case, however, your obedience and attention would be what he was seeking instead of a car starting, and he will try over and over again. In particular, you will see the demands ramp up exponentially over a short period of time, and it is imperative that you do not ever give in—if you give in during this time, it will be far more difficult in the future. Let the extinction burst die out. It will be rough for a short while, but after you make it clear that you will not respond, there is a good chance that the narcissist will simply declare that they did not like you and that they cut you off, and he will be on his way. Become the Grey Rock Another technique that is a bit more realistic if you cannot cut off for some reason, such as if you share children with a narcissistic ex, is to become the grey rock. Think about the last time you took a walk outside. Maybe you went through your yard, or maybe you went hiking. Can you remember any of the rocks you saw? Chances are, you cannot. And this is normal. The rocks are so mundane and irrelevant to your daily life that you have no reason to focus on them in the first place. Looking at the rocks does not matter to you because they are boring, and you do not commit any of them to memory. You want to channel that with the narcissist. If you can channel the boringness and mundaneness of that rock, you can bore the narcissist out of bothering with you in the future. All you need to do is ensure that you are as plain as possible in any and all interactions with them. Let’s say that you have children with your ex, and this is why you cannot simply cut them off. If he asks you how you are doing, you would simply ignore the question. If he asks you about the children, you answer shortly and with as little detail as possible. If he has any demands for you, instead of arguing about how they are ridiculous, you can say, “Okay.” And leave it at that if you are going to give in, or ignore them if they are not acceptable. Just as with the cut off method, you will find that the narcissist will ramp up in an attempt to get you to reply, but keep on ignoring it. You do not need to acknowledge anything irrelevant to children or other shared endeavors. This means that anything that does not require a response will not get one, and over time, the narcissist will get bored with being ignored. There is little to gain out of being entirely ignored, and the narcissist knows that. In the end, the narcissist will likely lose interest and leave you alone, just as with the cut off method. Take Advantage of Time Another common method that you can use, preferably in conjunction with the grey rock method, is to learn how to use time to your advantage. The narcissist is likely used to you jumping any time he asks you to. This means that he absolutely expects that behavior to continue. He will assume that you will jump any time he send that message to you. If he asks you for help, he assumes that you will drop everything and come to his aid. What you can do to eliminate that particular assumption is make sure that you actively end it. Set the narcissist to silent on your phone if you can so his messages do not bother you as they all come flying in, and do not respond. You should set some arbitrary amount of time to get back to him, if at all, simply because there is no reason for you to respond at his beck and call. If you are busy, then you are busy, and your phone is for your own convenience, not for the convenience of those around you. Start by pushing out your responses for a few hours for a while. Maybe decide that you will wait to read the narcissist’s messages for an hour after they arrive, and then enforce another hour during which you are debating how best to approach your response. This means that there would be a bare minimum of two hours between noticing the message and responding if you felt it warranted a response. This will be difficult at first, especially if you have been trained to respond to the narcissist any time he asks you to do something. You will find it hard to overcome that programming that makes you feel like you have no choice but to immediately reply. However, that is exactly what the narcissist wants, and you need to figure out how best to overcome it once and for all. Overcoming it is possible if you put in the effort, and while it will be uncomfortable, it will be well worth it. Over time, you will destroy that expectation that the narcissist has that you will be readily available at any moment if the narcissist determines that you should be. You will find that the narcissist will message you less and less, and that is absolutely okay with you. Create and Enforce Boundaries When you are in a healthy relationship, boundaries are expected. If you are going to be enforcing boundaries, you want to ensure that you are setting ones that are meaningful for you. Your boundaries are basically the laws for respect for yourself—they are the line you draw that marks behaviors that you will not tolerate. For example, a very common boundary that goes unspoken in most relationships is that there will be no physical violence. This means that both parties are well aware of the fact that everyone expects a complete lack of physical violence within the relationship, and both parties are willing to recognize and follow that boundary Narcissists are not fond of boundaries for good reason—they stand in the narcissist’s way. When the narcissist wants to control someone, they cannot exactly manage that if someone has a boundary specifically about wanting to be free to make decisions on his own. The narcissist then sees that boundary as a sort of challenge—the narcissist wants to take it down and prove that it does not matter. After all, the narcissist is special, remember? He believes that he is deserving of the honor of being able to stomp all over it without consequence simply because of his uniqueness and superiority. Of course, that is not the case. You absolutely can and should set boundaries, no matter what the narcissist says, and if anyone tries to completely steamroll those boundaries, then you know that they are not safe or respectful people to have in your life. If they are going to willingly throw away your boundaries without regard for how you feel, you cannot trust them at all, and that is a problem. You should be able to trust the people in your life. When you do set a boundary, you should make sure that you state that boundary explicitly to the narcissist, as well as pair it with a consequence. For example, you could tell the narcissist, “If you are going to continue to belittle me, I will end this visit until you are willing to talk to me like a respectful adult. The next time that he belittles you, and he will belittle you again to test that boundary, you must end the visit. You can simply stand up, pack your belongings, acknowledge that you are not okay with that behavior, and leave, telling him that you can try again when he is ready to be respectful. Most likely, he will whine and throw a fit about how you are so cruel for punishing him for his misbehavior, but think about it this way—you are not punishing him, you are protecting yourself. You are setting a reasonable boundary—to not be called names or belittled, and it is not punishment for the name caller for you to put distance between them and yourself. Would you call it punishing the snake if you refused to touch it because you knew that it would bit you? No—it is protecting yourself. You can try the interaction again after whatever period of time that you said would happen between the next disregard of boundaries, reiterating the boundary that you have for yourself and the consequence to ignoring it. The trick here is that you must follow through every time you put out a consequence. You need to be able to tell the narcissist that you will honor your own boundaries to protect yourself, whether he likes it or not, and do so to protect yourself. His comfort is not your responsibility, and if he really wanted to continue with the visit, he would not have caused you so many problems or ignored your very reasonable boundaries. Create Some Distance Sometimes, the best approach to a relationship with a narcissist is to create a slow fade away from how often you contact them. Effectively, you will slowly take more and more time to contact them in between normal intervals, stretching out the time between the frequency of contact when you begin and where you would like to be. For example, imagine that you have a narcissistic father. You love your father, but he is incredibly exhausting to deal with. Presently, he tries to call you every day at least twice, and you are finding that it is putting a huge strain on your own daily life. After all, you have your own life and children, and while you can understand a father wanting to communicate with his grown child, you also know that you are too busy for two hour long conversations out of your day, amounting to a whopping 13% of your waking hours. That is time that you could spend with your children, tending to yourself, keeping up with housework, or just sitting and enjoying the silence. After all, between work, school for the children, housework, homework, and making sure that everyone is ready for the next day, you feel like you only ever have a few minutes of peace to yourself. In this instance, you could make it a point to create some distance slowly with your narcissistic father. You would slowly stretch out how often you reply or get back to him. Perhaps you start by ignoring that first phone call every couple days—that is already significant and gets you a few hours of your time back per week. From there, you may decide to let your father know that you are busy when he calls and that you will give him a call over the weekend when things are less stressful. Over time, you would go from two phone calls a day, to a phone call every few days, to eventually once every week or two. This process takes time and patience, but eventually, you are able to stretch out the visits. Expect some pushback, as with all other narcissistic strategies, as the narcissist hates change that is not on his own terms. The fact that you are changing his schedule and expectations is a huge slight to him, and he will not be happy about it or respecting it, despite the fact that it is in your best interest. Chapter 9: Leaving the Abusive Relationship At this point, you may realize that your relationship is ruined. It is damaged beyond repair, and you know that you need out. However, leaving is always easier said than done, and especially if you cohabit and share children, all sorts of legalities must also be considered in order to safely exit without trouble. After all of the insight that you have gained through reading this book so far, you may now recognize that the abuse in your relationship is not going anywhere—it is there to stay. That is terrifying for most people and not something that you necessarily want to put up with. However, that is exactly why this guide exists. You can leave. This chapter will tell you how to leave, detailing what you should prepare. You can free yourself from the abuser’s grasp once and for all, breaking those chains and freeing yourself from the life of torment and abuse that you otherwise would have to endure. When you are sure that you are ready to leave, remember three things: Your partner will not change. You cannot help your partner to change. Your partner will promise and beg to keep you, but this is because he does not want to lose control. Ultimately, he is not ever going to put in the long term effort to change, especially if he is a narcissist because the narcissistic personality disorder that he suffers from prevents him from ever acknowledging that he is the problem in the first place. This means that he is going to remain the abusive person that he is, no matter how much you may want him to change. That is not your fault, and it is okay to grieve for that relationship that you have lost. However, do not let that grief hold you back from breaking those chains and finding freedom and health. Get Your Ducks in a Row As cute as this imagery may be, getting your ducks in a row is your ability to get everything in line and ready to go. You are going to be actively trying to make sure that everything that you will need in your exit is in one place and prepared. This stage will involve anything legal that you may need to do. Do you share children? Start looking into custody and what you will need to do to file for emergency custody. It is possible that if you have documentation to prove abuse, that you can get emergency custody of your children. In some states, if you are unwed as a mother, you retain full custody, even if your child’s father is on the birth certificate. Make sure that you consult a lawyer to double check on the legality of these things and ensure that you do not make any missteps that will damage your fight for custody. You will also want to make sure that all important documentation is lined up. Do you know where your legal paperwork is? Do you have your social security card and birth certificate? How about all paperwork for the car, insurance, joint property, and anything else relevant to you? Make sure that you gather up all important legal documents as well as making sure that you gather anything for your children as well. You want to make sure that you have the paperwork declaring custody if it is already worked out. If you are going to be filing for a restraining order and emergency custody, get all of that as well. With the paperwork lined up, you need to make sure that you also have all of your sentimental, irreplaceable items in one place that is easy to grab. Make sure that you have computers, hard drives, photo albums, and anything else that you would be devastated to lose if the narcissist decides to get destructive to punish you for leaving. You will want to put this all ina bag that you can carry out quickly, placing it with all of the legal paperwork. These are your go bags—they are there for you to take and leave as quickly as possible if the need should arise. Make sure that the go bag also has chargers—you want to have a spare set of car keys, some money, your phone and computer charger, anything that you will need for children if you do not have time to stop and gather things otherwise, and anything else that you know that you would need for a trip that is a few nights long. Remember, ultimately, your physical belongings can be replaced, and while you should put in the effort to protect your belongings if you can, if you cannot, do not bother. Focus on making sure you and your children and pets are out if you can. Ducksin a Row Checklist * All legal paperwork * Birth certificate/SSNs * Mortgages/leases * Car ownership papers * Bank information * Marriage paperwork * Insurance information * Diplomas/proof of education * Any important or sentimental items * Cell phone charger . Keys * Money Create a Safety Plan Leaving the relationship is perhaps the most dangerous time in an abusive relationship, and because of that, you need to have a safety plan in place. Think of this as a contingency plan just in case anything goes wrong—you never want to use it, but you want it to be there just in case. This safety plan should involve you identifying several safe areas in your home, as well as the best paths to get there. You will want to make sure that, if you notice that your abuser is starting to escalate, you can make sure that you are not trapped .This means that you should avoid areas with small spaces or that can have you blocked in regularly. You will also want to make sure that you avoid a room such as a kitchen, which is full of all sorts of easily weaponized items. Include your children in the safety plan as well—as much as you may be hoping that they are protected from the abuse, they most likely know that it is happening. Have a code word that you use to tell your children to get to your side or get to a safe spot immediately and without argument. In particular, you will want to make sure that you practice this several times, such as turning it into a game. Maybe your code word is “Sticky Tape!” and as soon as your children hear it, they all must run to touch you as soon as possible and stick to you like tape. This is a good way to remove some of the fear while still having it readily remembered for your children. Create an Escape Plan Now, with your ducks in a row, your belongings ready, and your children and yourself prepared with a safety plan, it is time to put together your escape plan. The safest may be to attempt to leave when your abuser is not present at home, such as during the workday, if at all possible. If not, you can try in the middle of the night. If your partner is home, you are always welcome to call for a police escort to get yourself and your children out of the home safely and without incident. Make sure that your escape plan involves where you will go, how you will get there, and how you will protect yourself. Can you go to stay with family that will help keep you safe while you stabilize? If not, consider a domestic violence shelter, as those ware well protected and can keep you and your children safe during this dangerous time. When it is time, make sure that you do not hesitate—go as soon as you said that you would to protect yourself and your children and remember that you are doing the right thing. This is not an easy process—leaving is never easy, especially if you do not have any money on you or access to the money. However, be proud that you are not willing to let yourself be held down, unable to live your life in peace and safety. You are choosing to move forward toward safety and happiness, and that is quite noble on its own. When you are ready to escape, keep in mind that your technology can be your worst enemy here—if you are trying to leave, you need to ensure that your abuser cannot possibly track you. If you have a smartphone, consider leaving it behind and buying a new burner phone if you can get away with it. Make sure that you log out of all iterations of family tracking and GPS monitoring that may exist on your phones, tablets, and computers. Beyond that, you will want to ensure that you change your passwords on all accounts as well, so your abuser cannot log in and track you or who you are talking to. The Aftermath Right after you have left, it is critical that you make sure that your information is kept as private as possible. You will want to make sure that you use a burner phone or a new phone number, which you specifically want to remain unlisted. You do not want anyone being able to track your number to your name. While most of the time, when you are moving, you make it a point to fill out a forwarding address with the post office to ensure that you get all of your mail, consider having it all forwarded to a PO box instead. This will mean that the only notification that your ex may be able to get is that you are using a PO box in a certain area. As you are setting up your new life, you will want to make sure that you disconnect from any and all bank or credit accounts that are shared—make sure that you speak to a lawyer about ownership beforehand if possible, as that can change from state to state, depending upon marital status and several other factors as well. You will absolutely want to avoid using any cards that your ex has access to, as your ex will be able to see where you are making transactions, and that can be enough information to piece together a general idea of where you are, something that you likely want to avoid. If you do happen to remain in the same city or town due to jobs, school, or other obligations, change up your routine. If you have children in school and daycare, you may want to consider reenrolling them elsewhere, as your ex, assuming he is their father, would likely be able to pick them up without any protest if they wanted to. Changing up as much of your routine will help you avoid being easily tracked. Keep in mind that your charged cell phone should be on your person at all times, and you should never hesitate to call for help if you need it. Once again, remember that you are doing the right thing in freeing yourself from the relationship. Following these steps can be helpful, but if you are unable to get access to the proper funds or necessities, or you do not have a mode of transportation to get out of the home, you can call your local domestic violence hotline. They should have resources that can help you remove yourself and your children from the home. As a benefit, domestic violence hotlines and shelters will have access to several benefits that can really help you get out of the abusive relationship and free yourself once and for all. You will have access to lawyers, shelters, financial help, counselors, and more, all of whom will specialize in helping and working with people in situations like yours. Chapter 10: Staying Free Once you are finally out of the relationship, you may find that after some time, you miss it. You will miss your ex, and while he may have been abusive or threatening, you still spent a portion of your life with him and feel like you want that back. It is only natural to miss those that you care about, but ultimately, you must have the self confidence and self discipline to remind yourself that you made the right decision to leave. In particular, you may find that you miss the good times, and that is natural. If your relationship had been nothing but negative, it never would have progressed beyond the initial date—the narcissist had to be able to win you over somehow, and that usually involves some sort of façade and persona. Nevertheless, it can be incredibly difficult to avoid the feelings of wanting to go back to the abuser, even after you have finally escaped once and for all. Keep in mind that if you have just escaped your relationship and feel like you want to go back, you are not alone. On average, it takes at least seven attempts for a person to break free from an abusive partner. However, just because wanting to go back and knowing that other people regularly go back does not mean that you should simply decide to go back because you miss your ex—you should try to resist. Retain that freedom that you fought for so hard and make sure that you stay free. In particular, this chapter will take the time to provide you with some advice designed to help keep you from returning to your abusive situation despite the temptation and desire you may have to do exactly that. Even if you are depressed where you are, or feeling like your home would be better than the room in a shelter that you are in, resist. Any time that you feel like you are wishing that things were different or when you tell yourself that you are struggling due to your own failures, remind yourself that abuse is not your fault. It is not your fault that you were targeted by a narcissist. You were preyed upon by the abuser, and that had nothing to do with who you are or what you deserve. You could never have known that everything would play out the way that they did. That is not your fault, and it never will be. The road to recovery begins with you no longer taking blame for the narcissist’s actions. This means that you must reject the idea that you are somehow at fault for everything that happened. The abuse lies firmly with the narcissist, and you need to remind yourself of that. Remind yourself that no one deserves to be abused in your moments of weakness, and remind yourself that you may not be where you had hoped to be, but at least you are free. You have left that cage once and for all and you are finally free to stretch your wings and learn to fly. Now that you are away, it is time to stay away. You can do it. Find Support The first way that can help you strengthen your resolve during those moments of weakness is to find support. Find friends or family that you can turn to if you need to talk during those moments, knowing that you will be fully and wholly supported by them when you do so. Make sure that you primarily surround yourself with people that you know and trust, or find a support group for people with similar stories to you. If you have gone through a domestic violence shelter, you may already have access to this by having access to all of the resources that usually follow the shelter. They likely have support groups held for those living at the shelter at any given time. If they do not have a support group, they can surely point you in the right direction toward finding one that will be beneficial to you. You are very likely to find that being able to talk to other people will actually be incredibly beneficial to you—when you can talk to others, you are free to hear other stories .Just knowing that other people have lived through what you have been through can help you find comfort in those moments of loneliness when you are wondering where you went so wrong. You will be able to branch out and make new friends who have been where you are. They will know how to help you simply because they will have been there before, and their advice can be absolutely critical to keeping you afloat during such a dark time. Write Down Your Reasons for Leaving Another way that may help you fight off all of the tempting feelings of going back to the narcissist is to write down every reason that you left. Spend the time when you are safe to go over what made you finally pull the trigger and leave. For Talia, it was that the Ned she knew was a lie. She did not appreciate being fooled into falling in love for someone who never existed in the first place. For you, it could be that you are sick of the abuse. You finally acknowledge that you deserve better, or that your children deserve better. If you do have children, look at them. Do they deserve to grow up in a home full of dysfunction? Do you really want that life for them? Most parents would never want that for their children, and for them, leaving would be the obvious choice. Of course, just because you know that you would want better for your children does not mean that your feelings will just stop. Your feelings are just that—feelings—, and they are not to be believed. After having written down all of the reasons that you can think of for leaving, you can return to the list any time that you are feeling week. Are you thinking about that one date that you had that was entirely romantic, next to the beach? Remind yourself that it was probably a lie and that the narcissist most likely felt nothing for you and read over your list. Are you realizing that your birthday is coming up, and you are going to have to spend it without an adult to talk to? Read over that list again and remind yourself why it is so important to you. Consider also writing down any and all instances of suspected gaslighting that you can think of. Think about all the times that your ex told you something was wrong or that you were not remembering things properly. Think of how you felt, feeling like you were slowly losing your mind, and latch onto that anger. Tell yourself that you are not going to accept that treatment again, and you are not willing to return to being treated like you cannot possibly understand what is right in front of your face. Find a Hobby Perhaps one of the least specific pieces of advice that you are ever going to receive consider finding a hobby or something else to keep you busy during moments of weakness. Just having something else to do to occupy the time can help the feeling pass, even when you are feeling tempted to return back to the narcissist for any reason at all. Have you ever wanted to try something new or learn a new skill? This is the time to go for it—figure out exactly what it is that you have been wanting in life and go for it. If you have always dreamed of learning to draw without being mocked or laughed at for whatever you have chosen as your medium or subject, now is your time. Do you want to make it a point to learn how to knit? Take some extra cash if you have it and go get a beginner’s kit. You have nothing but time on your hands that used to be filled by the narcissist —take it back and do something for yourself. This does two things: Not only are you keeping yourself busy, but you are also doing something to better yourself, and bettering yourself may help you feel better about yourself. Boosting your self confidence as you succeed at a new skill is always a huge welcome bonus. Chapter 11: The Importance of Empathy Empathy is one of those buzzwords that you hear thrown around a lot in modern psychology and self help sources. You may hear the empath discussed, especially in regards to narcissism. You may hear people say that they are an empath at heart, or that they are incredibly empathetic. However, do you know what is meant by calling someone an empath? Empaths are people who are highly in tune to their surroundings and those within them. In particular, they are usually able to sense the feelings of others with ease. This is a skill known as empathy, and this is a critical skill for people to master. Empathy is the skill that the narcissist does not have— he cannot empathize, and because he cannot empathize, he cannot effectively manage to relate to other people. How about you? Are you empathetic? Do you have a good idea of what empathy is? Do you want to be more empathetic? What can empathetic behavior help you do, and how can it be beneficial? All of these are fantastic questions to ask if you are unfamiliar with the concept of empathy itself. Even if you are unfamiliar, do not fret—this chapter is focused on empathy and how you can use it to protect yourself. In particular, we will delve into looking at what empathy is, what the types of empathy are, and how empathy can be used to help you better yourself. You will see how empathy can fight narcissism, as well as how you can use it to become less susceptible to narcissism as a whole. What is Empathy? Empathy, at its simplest, is the human capacity to relate to other people. You use empathy to help facilitate communication, for example, in order to better understand those around you. It allows you to understand what those around you are feeling in particular, allowing you to essentially step into the shoes of the other person by relating to them. Imagine for a moment that you are walking down the street and you see a homeless person sitting out in the rain. You feel sad for the person because he is stuck out in the rain and it is cold. You understand what it means to be cold and wet, something that you have been before, though maybe not within the same context, and you feel empathetic for the man. You know that he is likely suffering, and that makes you feel sad and hopeless. Effectively, you take on the feelings of the other person in order to relate to him. It serves a secondary purpose as well: It allows you to regulate your own behaviors appropriately. For example, if you can see that you are making your child upset as you yell, you are likely to stop, feel those feelings that your child is in response to your yelling, and use that knowledge to regulate your own emotions. You then make it a point tO avoid yelling because you know that it was causing problems in your relationship with your child. When you do this, you effectively are using your empathy in order to regulate yourself and your behavior, and that is a critical social skill to have. You know that the narcissist not having this ability is a major reason that he is unable to relate to those around him, and that is what made him more likely to be abusive, after all. Empathy then has two very serious functions: Communication and regulation. When you are able to communicate your emotional state to other people, you are effectively able to make sure that you are actively broadcasting out your needs. After all, emotions are closely linked to needs that must be met, so when you are having your emotions read by someone else, they are effectively learning what your needs are. If they see that you are sad, they are likely to know that you need support, simply because that is what sadness conveys—a need for support. If they see that you are afraid, they are going to know that what you need is safety, as something present around you is frightening you. Empathy then allows for nonverbal communication. It allows for people to tell others exactly what they need at that given moment without them having to ever say a word. Think of how effective that is—how long would it take if every time that you had a feeling, you had to verbally express that you were happy or sad? You would spend an awful long time talking about your constantly fluctuating emotions, especially since emotions are not particularly stable in the first place. Emotions are constantly fluctuating; sometimes, every few seconds, and empathy allows for their communication easily. Types of Empathy Empathy primarily exists in three forms that are important to understand. These three forms are cognitive, emotional, and compassionate. Each serves a slightly different purpose, but it is only when you are able to be completely empathetic that you become truly capable of using everything that empathy has to offer you. Cognitive empathy is the ability to understand emotions. It is entirely cognitive, with nothing to do with emotions or feelings. This is your ability to look at someone else, see a smile, and understand that they must be happy. You do not have to actively be feeling that happiness—you just know that is what is being felt simply because you know that smiling is a sign of happiness. This form of empathy is quite simplistic, but it has its own uses. You can still make good inferences on the emotional states of others and, therefore, their needs that they have at that moment if you are able to read how someone is feeling. This means that you can tell what is going on without really feeling compelled toward anything. Emotional empathy goes one step further. When you are able to empathize emotionally, you are able to feel the emotions of the other person. You see that person smiling, and feel the need to smile yourself as well. That smile becomes entirely contagious, and you cannot help but feel the need to smile as well. This is also incredibly important to understand—when you can empathize emotionally, you better understand the mindset of the other person. You are more likely to relate well if you can feel the other party’s feelings as well. For example, you are more likely to feel like you should relate. If you see someone that is scared and you feel that fear just by looking at the other person, you are going to be more likely to want to help. That brings us to compassionate empathy. This form of empathy is entirely about combining other forms of empathy. You are essentially taking over the cognitive and emotional empathies and recognizing what each brings to the table. In recognizing the cognitive state of the other party, you get a good idea of what is going on in the other person’s mind. You can start to piece together why they feel the way that they do. With the emotional empathy added in as well, you find that you are more compelled to help. You can feel how they feel and you want to make sure that the other people are taken care of as well. This means that you can use your empathy to ensure that anyone that you are surrounding yourself with is able to make sure their needs are met at any given time. Compassionate empathy is what should be striven for. It allows people to take care of each other, coming together to ensure that everyone’s needs get met. As a social species, we are strongly dependent upon each other to ensure that we can actually engage with other people. We are actually able to make sure that we can take care of each other simply because we actually relate to each other. When everyone feels compassionate empathy for each other, people are happy to help simply to help. They understand that if they help their neighbors, their neighbors are also likely to help them when they have a time of need as well. This is incredibly important—when you are able to rely on your neighbors, the survival of the species is more likely. Of course, nowadays, we do not need to depend on others for as much survival. You no longer have to worry about planting enough food to last all winter—you can just go to the store. You can call people and pay them money to help them. You no longer have to foster these close, neighborly relationships, but that comes at a pretty significant cost—you are no longer making those bonds that were once commonplace. Empathy to Fight Narcissism When you are trying to deal with a narcissist, you may find yourself struggling immensely. You find that it is next to impossible to approach the situation and figure out how to convince the narcissist that they are wrong —because they are hardwired to deny the idea of being wrong. They have to be right at all times, even if that comes at the cost of hurting other people. While people can try to teach the narcissist to behave and to take into consideration the feelings of others, it is not likely to get particularly far. Instead, what may be the best way to handle the narcissist is to approach the narcissist with empathy. When you approach the narcissist with an empathetic approach in mind, you are not doing it to have your actions reciprocated—you already know that the narcissist will not do that at any point in time. However, you can use your own empathy to acknowledge what is going on with the narcissist. Just because the narcissist does not empathize on his own does not mean that you cannot remove some of the threats by approaching the narcissist with an empathetic perspective. This does not even mean that you have to approach the narcissist at all—all you need to do is be willing to consider the fact that the narcissist is simply hardwired differently and that his attempts to control should not be met with anger and frustration. Think about it this way for a moment—f the narcissist were a snake, would you really fault him for biting you? The answer is probably no—you would expect it to bite you, and therefore, you would take the necessary steps to keep your own distance. This is exactly what you will be doing with empathy and your approach to narcissists. If you can identify someone as a narcissist, just leave them be. Give them their peace and their space and simply refuse to engage. If you can do this, approaching the situation pragmatically and empathetically, you remove much of the danger. The narcissist is going to have a hard time inflicting emotional harm if you have already discredited and disregarded him. What if, instead of feeling like the narcissist were truly evil, you looked at why he was the way he was? You may stop and consider that you, too, feel grandiose sometimes—such as when you are successful at something. Perhaps you felt that little flare of grandiosity when you finally escaped. This is not a bad thing—that feeling has a very good reinforcing purpose. However, the narcissist is incredibly grandiose to a fault and to a point in which it can actually be annoying and problematic. He causes issues with his grandiosity because his grandiosity is unchecked. However, is that his fault, or is that because of his personality disorder? Now, while you will never be told that you absolutely must treat the narcissist as your best friend, you should remember to empathize with him from time to time. Remember that empathizing is not the same as forgiveness, nor is it saying that you are willing to give him another chance. More than anything, it is your ability to recognize what the narcissist is capable of and why he is the way that he is. After all, if you chose to disregard your ability to empathize with the narcissist, would you be any better than he is? The narcissist does not empathize because it just does not come naturally to him. However, if it comes naturally to you, should you automatically approach the world with that empathy? Many people would say yes, that empathy is kind and compassionate and will make the world a better place. Overall, it will be up to you whether you want to use empathy with the narcissist, but it should be strongly considered. Empathy to Increase Self Awareness Beyond just to understand people, empathy is actually quite useful in the development of other social skills as well. In particular, empathy is a great segue to self awareness, and that self awareness can really help you to fight off the tendency to fall into aggressive or abusive relationships. When you are self aware, you recognize yourself. You know what your true abilities and feelings are, and that your self awareness is accurate. In particular, self awareness is necessary if you want to be able to regulate your own behaviors, thanks to knowing your limits. When you are not particularly self aware, you run into a lot of the same problems that the narcissist suffers from. You will find that you cannot regulate yourself effectively, and if you cannot understand your own feelings, you are not going to be able to understand the feelings of others, either. However, if you already have a base of being highly empathetic, you can try to use that empathy to really help you understand other people as well. If you can see what someone else’s body, language is saying. Ultimately, your self awareness and ability to empathize are far closer related than you may have thought, and the more empathy you have, the more likely you are to make it a point to regulate what you are saying. That regulation of understanding what is going on is what will help you with the development of self awareness. If you know that your actions are upsetting other people, for example, you are coming across in a way that is clearly inappropriate in the eyes of other people. This means that other people are entirely unhappy with how you are presenting yourself, and you will need to figure out why. Your empathy then allows you to start figuring out why they were unhappy. What did you do that caused it? If you see that in particular, people seem to be annoyed with your insistence to do something a certain way, you could assume that your desire to complete whatever it was is the problem. Perhaps you were coming across as pushy. Now, you are able to acknowledge that the people were annoyed with you, and then figure out exactly why. When you are aware of what you are doing and how it is impacting those around you, you are far more likely to be cautious in the future. You will then be more self aware. Effectively, then, self awareness is regulated by empathy, and that makes the two quite powerful when used in tandem. Empathy to Build Self Esteem Just as empathy and self awareness are closely related, you must also be able to acknowledge the fact that empathy and self esteem share a similar bond. Self esteem is critical to how we see ourselves. Your own self esteem is largely the way that you view yourself in the world. Are you happy with who you are, or do you feel like something about your personality is inherently flawed? Do you feel like your ability to help other people is so incredibly stunted that you are not particularly valuable, or do you think that you are a good person? Think about self esteem for a moment and what the words may mean. You are literally creating an estimate of yourself. You are effectively defining your value, as seen in your own eyes. If you have a high self esteem, or a healthy self esteem, you view yourself quite positively. Some people’s self esteem may be too high, such as the narcissist—but in moderation, self esteem is critical to being successful in the world around you. If you have a healthy self esteem, you have your own boundaries and limits for yourself. You are effectively able to say that you respect yourself and put a line on where that respect is. You can tell what you think about yourself by looking at that line. Low self esteem, however, implies that your image of yourself is quite negative. You feel like the image that you present is problematic or flawed, or you feel like the person that you are is inherently negative. When you have a low self esteem, you do not trust yourself. You do not think that the person that you are is worthy of respect or love, or you may even feel like you are a waste of space and time in the world. Self esteem is one of those traits that you want in moderation in order to be healthy, and empathy can help you achieve exactly that. Consider, for a moment, the effect of mutual empathy. For example, imagine that you and your friend are able to empathize with each other. You are able to respect each other and show each other how much you care about each other. You can make sure that you are able to show the other person your own assessment of their own worth. You value them, and you are able to show that through relating to their feelings. The more you empathize with someone, the more you value who they are, what they like, and how you see them. Now, if you just empathized with your friend, how do you think that made him feel? The answer is that he probably felt pretty good—he was justified by you acknowledging his position and his own feelings, and that was something that he truly appreciated. You effectively showed him that he cared, and in response, he was happier than he had been in a while. Now, consider that the empathy is mutual—he empathized with you when you were talking about the problem with the narcissist that you have recently escaped from. You feel validated and supported, as well. When you feel like people validate and support you, you feel like other people are hearing who you are and actually caring about what you are saying. This means that you are able to see that other people are, in fact, acknowledging you, your feelings, and your likes and dislikes. You are seeing that, unlike how the narcissist told you, you do have inherent value. The narcissist may have damaged your self esteem by refusing to acknowledge your values and emotions, but you can begin to heal from that. You can draw from the empathy of others to begin to heal those wounds. Empathy reminds you that others in the world do, in fact, care about you. They do care what you think about the world. They do care how you are feeling and whether you can claim that all of your needs have been met. They want to ensure that you are able to take care of yourself, and they are able to help. If even random strangers that you do not know can empathize with you, then what does that tell you? It tells you that your self esteem should improve. It tells you that your narcissistic ex’s attempts to belittle you and bring you down were little more than tools to keep you easily subdued, and without the narcissist present, you should be willing to acknowledge this. This means then that without the narcissist to continue bringing you down you should be able to begin healing more and more. You can make sure that you are actually beginning to feel better, and acknowledging that you do have an inherent value that other people see. Empathy will remind you to heal that inherent value. It will help that damaged; wilted self esteem begin to blossom and flourish once more, nourished upon the love and empathy from other people. If other people can see your value without knowing you, then you must have some. Chapter 12: Protecting Yourself Against Future Abuse Finally, you have made it—this is the last chapter within the book. Congratulations on your journey, and good luck as you begin to enter the chapter dedicated to bettering yourself! While it is in no way your fault that you were abused and manipulated, you may be wondering what you can do in the future in order to avoid finding yourself victimized again. The answer is that there is no true way to never be the victim of an abusive relationship again unless you simply never get into a relationship. However, that is an incredibly unhealthy way to live life. People crave the closeness and intimacy of their relationships, and you deserve to acknowledge that need, even if it is tough to do so. While you cannot exactly create a foolproof guard against abuse, what you can do is make sure that you have chosen a way to sort of shield yourself. You can armor yourself into becoming someone who is a less attractive target for emotional and narcissistic abuse. Think for a moment about the narcissist’s favorite target—how many of those traits did you have? If I had to guess, I would say that you actually had several—and that is okay. However, you will need to make sure that you are actively bettering yourself in order to remain as protected as you can be. If you lack self confidence, learning to be confident is the natural next step. If you feel like the problem is something inherent with you, you may find benefit from therapy. You may decide to develop your own emotional intelligence in an attempt to better protect yourself in the future, or you may create affirmations to help you build up some self esteem and self worth. No matter what you choose to do, you will be able to acknowledge that you are bettering yourself in some way to help yourself remain safe in the future. As you read through this chapter, do not feel like you are limited to what is discussed. If you want to build confidence, but have a different method that you would like to use, then go for it. Trust yourself and your own judgment. After all, you are your own free person now, and you can choose what you will do and where you will do it. You do not need the permission of a book to make sure that you can get the build up and protection that you want! Building Confidence Let’s start by defining confidence once more—it is your ability to feel like you can rely on yourself. If you are confident, you feel like you are trustworthy and that you will protect yourself in some way. You will effectively make sure that you are able to trust your own judgment if you are confident, allowing you to resist the urge to fall for any future gaslighting attempts. Remember, the reason that you were likely so susceptible to many of the abuse tactics was a lack of confidence. That confidence is perhaps your greatest shield that will protect you from an emotional manipulator. Because confidence will mean that you trust yourself, your thoughts, and your perceptions inherently, you remove the power of being able to convince you that you are wrong. The narcissist needs someone that is not particularly confident specifically because keeping someone that is not particularly confident is keeping someone who is very easily manipulated and controlled. This means that the best targets are those without the confidence to trust themselves and respect themselves to leave any sort of abusive situation. When you want to develop your own confidence, you are effectively going to be teaching yourself to trust your judgment. This means that you will be doing several little trust exercises to ensure that you are actually able to remain safe. Thankfully, confidence is not fixed—it is a skill that you can develop over time through practice. It will be a matter of finding aspects of life that will help to bring you confidence. Do you like sports? Perhaps you join a martial arts class aimed toward domestic abuse survivors to help foster a sense of self confidence. Do you like video games? Pick a new one and get good at it. No matter what you do, the important part is that you must choose something to dedicate yourself to doing, allow yourself to follow through, and then make sure that you acknowledge to yourself that you did do whatever it was that you set out to do. Over time, you will find that your confidence will build. You may find that social interactions with people grow easier because you are not as ashamed of yourself. You may do better at job interviews because you feel better about who you are, or that you have a higher value than before. No matter the technique that you are going to use, just make sure that you stick to it and continue to acknowledge yourself and your abilities over time. All you will need to do is ensure that you are able to be the person that you are trying to be. Putting in that effort and actively striving to be the best will help you see the best results. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy If you were easily victimized by the manipulator or the narcissist, it may be worth spending some time in cognitive behavioral therapy. In particular, this therapy is quite skilled at making sure that you are able to protect yourself. You will be able to learn several skills that will be able to help you be as successful as you desire to be. In particular, CBT focuses on how to teach you how to become able to cope with any problem that you face. Is your self esteem low? With CBT, you can learn to identify why your self esteem is slow in the first place and then figure out how to begin restructuring those thoughts into something that is more productive, beneficial to everyone, and capable of helping you become happier. CBT is all about cognitive restructuring, figuring out how to identify those thoughts that pose the biggest challenges to us and then becoming capable of correcting them in order to ensure that we are better in general. Think about the difference between CBT and a traditional therapy for a moment—a traditional psychotherapy is going to focus on you being able to talk through your problems. It may help you solve that one problem that has been driving you insane, but is it really going to make sure that you are actually fully capable of solving problems on its own? No, it won’t. CBT seeks to teach all sorts of different coping mechanisms that can be used to help better yourself. You will have techniques for defeating phobias and for learning how to change your thoughts. You will learn how to cope with stress and how to make yourself that much stronger of a person. You will be able to do it all, thanks to the fact that you will be able to learn skills that are vague enough to be used in nearly any setting. That is the magic of CBT and why it is so effective—it is tool based. All you will do is figure out how to use the tools that will help you get through the process of coping with stress, and that is powerful. Think of the expression of being able to teach a man to fish and feeding him for a lifetime. CBT is effectively teaching you to fish, and you will be able to reuse them over and over again. So long as you are willing to continue using those techniques, you will find that you are able to continue to see effects over and over again. Keep in mind that there is no shame or harm in therapy. You should never be made to feel like you are less than capable because you have gotten help coping with your problems. In fact, being willing to admit that you need help is far more admirable than refusing to ever go. If you were willing to put in the effort with your own skills, learning to cope with your own problems, you deserve that recognition. Even better, doing so will help you protect yourself from the narcissist once and for all. You will be able to patch up all of those traits that that narcissist enjoys, so you are not so susceptible. You will be able to tell yourself that you can develop self esteem. You will be able to figure out your codependency problem. You will be able to figure out exactly why you were so willing to put up with all of that abuse for so long and how you can finally overcome it. You will learn how to figure out the best way to boost your self confidence and self esteem, as well as how to use your empathy effectively, all with the help of this therapy that you may otherwise have chosen to avoid out of fear of stigma. Emotional Intelligence One other skillset that may be beneficial to protecting yourself as well is learning to be emotionally intelligent. Emotional intelligence is defined as the ability to understand and identify your own emotions, as well as regulate them. You will also be able to identify and regulate the feelings of other people as well with this skillset. In particular, those who use emotional intelligence recognize that there are four distinct skillsets that go into it: There is the skillset of self awareness, the skillset of self regulation, the skillset of social awareness, and the skillset of relationship management. Each of these are useful in their own different ways, but when all four come together, you can create skilled leaders that are empathetic, persuasive, well liked, and confident. Self awareness in emotional intelligence is a focus on how to understand your own emotions and abilities. You will effectively look at how you are behaving and feeling. You will also be taking a closer look at how accurately you can identify your strengths and weaknesses. You need to be able to understand your weaknesses and strengths if you ever hope to better yourself and make sure that you know what you are capable of. When you know what you are capable of, you can make only the commitments that you know that you can do, and if you know where you struggle, you can ask for help without worrying about how you will fail if you attempt to actually go through with trying to work within your weaknesses. Self regulation focuses on your ability to control yourself. You will be understanding how to avoid responding to those emotional impulses that you feel that push you toward behaviors that would otherwise be problematic, such as actively making it a point to avoid yelling, despite wanting to yell incredibly badly. When you can self regulate, you avoid hurting other people through carelessness. Social awareness refers to your ability to empathize with other people and understand the emotions of other people. When you are able to empathize with other people, you can directly understand what they are feeling and thinking, which provides valuable insight to needs and motivations. With your ability to empathize in emotional intelligence, you are able to begin figuring out how to regulate the behaviors of others as well. When you learn to regulate the behaviors of others as well, you are learning the skill of relationship management. You are learning to accurately determine what people are capable of, see how they interact with other people, and figure out how they are able to best benefit everyone involved. Effectively, then, you are able to begin to influence the behaviors of others with ease as well. You do this through watching how your own behaviors influence the emotional states of others in order to figure out the best approach. Developing emotional intelligence does not need to be difficult—all it takes is some patience and willing to read books, not unlike this one. If you think that you could benefit from emotional intelligence, it is a highly recommended technique and segues away from understanding abuse and the reasons behind abuse. Affirmations Finally, the last technique that you will be given to help yourself is how to create an affirmation. This is an incredibly common technique that can be used to help you change your mindset little by little. When you use an affirmation, you will effectively be able to make sure that you can tell yourself something short that reminds you to change the way that you are thinking in that moment. Commonly used to combat negative thoughts, you may find this particularly useful if the narcissist has really done a number on your self worth. To create an affirmation, you must simply follow three specific rules: It must be positive, it must be personal, and it must be present tense. Let’s go over why each of these points are important: When you make a positive affirmation, you are making sure that it is keeping you in the right mindset. After so long being talked to in the negative by the narcissist, it is time to break away once and for all. This means that you will need to figure out how best to word whatever you wish in positives. For example, if you want to not be so negative, you may instead write your affirmation to focus on thinking positively instead. When you make a personal affirmation, you make sure that it is something that you have control over. You can control yourself, so you want to make sure that your affirmation is aimed toward yourself. When it is, you can ensure that it is something that you can regulate effectively enough. For example, you can tell yourself that you are going to think positive thoughts, but you cannot tell yourself that you will make the narcissist think positively. This is exactly why your affirmation has to be personal—so you can regulate it. Finally, when you make sure that your affirmation is present tense, you are asserting that it is true right at that moment. If it were worded in the future tense, you could arguably say that you would not start to work on it until sometime in the future, meaning that it is not actually true that moment, and likewise, if it were oriented in the past tense, you could deny that it was actually true right at that minute. For that reason, it must be present tense. So now, you have three requirements: it must be personal, positive, and present tense. To figure out your affirmation, figure out first what you want. If you want to feel more confident, for example, you may set up so you repeat notes of positivity to yourself. You tell yourself that you are good enough exactly the way you are with a statement such as, “I am happy with who I am today.” Notice how it is present tense, it is positive, and it is personal. This means that it is effective. From there, the affirmation is then used any time you feel like you need a little extra push toward the positive mindset you are trying to maintain. If you are trying to keep that positivity, you may make sure that it is repeated any time you start to doubt yourself. Any time that you feel like you are less than thrilled with yourself, you remind yourself that you are happy with the you that you are that day. On top of that, affirmations are particularly effective when they are used on the regular while you are doing something else habitual. Maybe you repeat your affirmation every time you buckle your seatbelt in the car or every time that you stop for water throughout the day. In repeating your affirmation throughout the day, you make yourself more likely to finally internalize and believe it over time. Just as the narcissist was able to insert negative thoughts into your own mind with repetition, you can create your own positive thoughts with your own repetition as well. Conclusion Thank you for reaching the end of Emotional and Narcissistic Abuse Recovery. This book was designed to give you a full portrait of who the emotional abuser and narcissist are as people, understanding exactly how cruel and insidious they can be, as well as how to recover yourself. As you read through this book, you were provided with several reminders that abuse is never your own fault. When you are abused, someone else has made the choice to hurt you, and that does not reflect on who you are as a person. You must remember this—you cannot be held accountable for the fact that someone else has abused you. Nevertheless, you can choose how to handle that abuse. Within this book, you were shown exactly how you should treat the abuse that you have faced if you have spent your life with a narcissist. You were guided through how to identify whether you have been abused in the past, how to identify the abuser, and how to begin to heal. You were walked through the kinds of abuse that are common with narcissists, as well as how you can fight back. Ultimately, as you have finished up this book, it is with the utmost hope that you have found this book to be beneficial and informative. Every effort was made to make sure that it not only packed plenty of information about understanding the narcissist and the abuser but also how to combat that abuse in a way that is actionable. In reading through this book, you should have found at least some techniques that would help you. From here, your best bet is to continue working on yourself. If you have been caught in a narcissistic relationship, take the time to heal and work on who you are. Build up that self esteem and self confidence little by little. Learn how to combat abuse and manipulation, more specifically. You may decide that you want to spend the time to become more emotionally intelligent to help you build that confidence and empathy, and that would be a fantastic starting point. Cognitive behavioral therapy would be another stellar place to go from here. Nevertheless, as you wrap up this book, please accept my heartfelt appreciation in being willing to take this journey. Remember that you did not deserve to be abused, nor should you ever tolerate the abuse that you have endured in the past. You deserve to be treated with love and patience and to find someone that loves the person that you are. If you can find that person, you will find that life gets so much better. Remember the signs that were given for the narcissist and narcissistic abuse as you continue on your journey, and finally, if you have found that the book provided has helped you in any truly meaningful way, whether through the insight provided, in the tools given to you, or in the understanding of the narcissist, please feel free to move over to Amazon and leave a review with your honest opinion. Feedback from readers is always greatly appreciated and encouraged. Your feedback will help the next book be even better! Thank you and good luck once more—You can do this!
Chapter 1: The Dark Side of Psychology. What is Dark Psychology Dark Psychology versus Psychology The Dark Side of Psychology Chapter 2: The Dark Triad + 1, The Dark Tetrad of the Human Psyche What is the Dark ‘Triad Everyday Sadists The Culture of BDSM A Veiled Dark Tetrad? Recognizing Dark Triad Dark Triad Dirty Dozen Test Chapter 3: The Art of Manipulation Types of Emotional Manipulators Personality Traits in Victims Chapter 4: Mind Control — Your Ultimate Terror What is mind control Mind Control Techniques Modern Mind Control Techniques Chapter 5: The Art and Science of Persuasion Punishment Nagging Chapter 1: The Dark Side of Psychology The brain is the largest organ in the human body and the most complex in structure. The billions of nerves in the brain works together with the synapses that help controls body functions. However, the human brain maybe manipulated and controlled through the art and science of Dark Psychology. What is Dark Psychology According to Psychologist and forensic consultant Michael Nuccitelli, Psy. D, dark psychology is a combination of human consciousness construct and the study of human condition in relation to the psychological nature of humans to target others due to deviant psychopathic or psychopathological criminal intent. While many try to restrain this tendency, others chose to act on these impulses. He further added that the entire human race has the potential to victimize all living creatures. Dark Psychology explores the workings of deviant, cybercriminal and criminal minds. Dark Psychology versus Psychology Psychology, according to the American Psychological Association is the scientific study of our mind and behavior. It is a complex discipline, which deals with sub field of studies in various areas such as sports, health, clinical, social behavior, human development and cognitive processes. Dark psychology is psychological science and art of mind control and manipulation. It is a psychological phenomenon by which, individuals employ tactics as persuasion, coercion, motivation and manipulation to make other people do what they want. The Dark Side of Psychology Researchers have long established that every individual has a dark side in them but the problem lies on how you can control this dark side so as not to cause suffering and pain to others. The dark side of the human behavior exists in schools, politics, offices, and workplaces. The dark behavior range from oppression, greediness, intimidation, selfishness, bullying, and even killing. Dark psychology aims to gain control and power over individual and groups by employing coercion, persuasion, and manipulation tools even if these tools can harm their target. Leaders, politicians, lawyers, sociopaths, public speakers, sales people, and/or selfish people use manipulative tactics to gain control and power. Even your own parents may be unknowingly using dark psychology on you. Dark Psychology & Manipulation: Are You Using Them Unknowingly? If someone tells you that you are manipulative, you would probably react and say “No,” The truth is every individual is capable of being manipulative. From the time you were born, you have unknowingly been manipulating your parents. A baby cries when he or she wants attention from the parent. The baby gurgle with laughter, enticing the parent fall deeply in love with them. As you grow up the manipulation continues. You would have tantrums to get your own way and when you see it working, you continue this until you grew up. You tell little white lies as you cover up using the excuse that you do not wish to hurt them. While most individual are aware of using these dark tactics, others use it without being aware of it. Chapter 2: The Dark Triad + 1, The Dark Tetrad of the Human Psyche The Dark Triad refers to the three negative personality traits that has common malevolent features. These traits were termed by researchers Delroy Paulhus and Kevin Williams. A fourth dark trait joins the original dark triad. One of the darkest and highly volatile trait and the most complex. What is the Dark Triad Research conducted on the dark triad is usually used in applied psychology particularly in fields of clinical psychology, business management and law enforcement. Research showed that dark triad traits are distinct by concept but empirical evidence show it overlaps each other. In 1998, controversy sparked when it was claimed that the dark triad are interchangeable and not distinct. Delroy L. Paulhus contradicted this, inspiring a series of research on the dark triad. Paulhus and colleagues found enough personality, behavioral and cognitive differences in the traits to prove their claim that the triad are distinct but overlapping. They concluded that additional research is necessary to find out why and how they overlap. The original Dark Triad are: e Narcissists. Narcissists are egocentric, self promoters, braggarts; lacks empathy; sense of grandiose, entitlement and superiority. Many popular artists in the entertainment world have narcissist personality. e Machiavellians. Machiavellians are calculating, manipulative, duplicitous, amoral, callous, and subtle cheaters. Their focus is personal gain and self interest. Like Narcissists, it is always about “Me,” Most Machiavellians can manipulate you before you can even realize it. e Psychopaths. Psychopaths has the darkest personality among the triad. They embody both characteristics of Narcissists and Machiavellians. The difference is their lack of remorse and impulsive traits. They have little concern about others and could not care less about the harm they bring others. Everyday Sadists After giving enough evidence to show the distinct traits of the dark triad, Delroy Paulhus is once again challenging it. Together with his University of British Columbia colleague Erin Buckles and Daniel Jones from University of Texas in El Paso, they suggest the triad is not complete. They accept the legitimacy of the original dark triad but suggest that the true core of the dark side of human personality is not a triad but a tetrad. The missing trait: Sadism . To test if their hypotheses is correct, Paulhus, Buckles and Jones conducted a controlled laboratory test on 71 participants. The studies revealed that those whose score measures high on sadism seem to take pleasure in seeing others in pain to the extent of making extra effort to inflict hurt on others. They are not necessarily sexual deviants or serial killers but it gives them a sense of pleasure in inflicting or seeing someone in pain. Sadism has been added to the original dark triad to create the Dark Tetrad. The everyday sadists are just as callous as the other three, they are manipulative and impulsive as well but they differ in their enjoyment of inflicting cruelty and harm to others. Sadists often harm others through legitimate guise like initiation practices in the military or police. Domestic violence is a form of sadism where the aggressor manipulates the target into believing he inflicts harm out of love. Dominance and feeling of superiority prevails in a sadist. The Culture of BDSM A Veiled Dark Tetrad? BDSM stands for Bondage, Discipline, Dominance and Submission, Sadomasochism. When the works of Marquis de Sade went public, Sadism became synonymous with sexual fetishes. This is an unfortunate and inaccurate view according to scientists. A sadist craves cruelty. They find the act of inflicting hurt on others pleasurable, giving them an adrenalin rush they cannot find under normal circumstances. BDSM or Bondage, Domination, Sadism & Masochism for those who practice it is a lifestyle. A choice, where two consenting adults agree to dominate and be dominated. It is a role play where they use safe words to set the limits of the one being dominated. The role play includes inflicting pain by use of whips and other tools and often leads to sexual penetration. However, the question remains whether this is a psychological disorder or not. According to an article in Psychology Today, sexual sadism disorder is a paraphilic disorder. Paraphilia includes fantasies, interests, urges, preferences and behaviors that are sexual in nature and outside the norm. However, they only become symptoms of a disorder if acted upon in a manner where it can cause potential harm or distress to others or to oneself, most especially to others who did not give consent. In a nutshell, this is saying engaging in BDSM is not a sign of sexual sadism disorder as long as it is consensual and does not cause distress or harm to both parties. Recognizing Dark Triad Unfortunately, it is difficult to recognize people with these personalities. They are often charming, socially adept, and projects a good impression to the outside world. Some can even get good jobs because they do better in interviews than the average person due to their lack of nervousness and anxiety about other people’s opinion. However, some physical manifestations can give away the dark triad. Example, most narcissists are more conscious of their physical appearance. They tend to dress well, wear provocative clothes, wear make up or anything that would make them stand out and look physically attractive. Dark triads can conceal their true nature and would often appear as charming, sweet and loveable. Unless they are clinically evaluated, it will be difficult to spot them but some telltale clues like habitual lies, bullying, and lack of empathy are demonstrations that they may have one or more of the these dark traits. Dark Triad Dirty Dozen Test To measure and identify the dark triad, researchers and clinicians use a 12 item measuring scale system called the Dark Triad Dirty Dozen (DTDD). The DTDD was designed not to diagnose personality disorders but to set a standard score to measure the three dark traits simultaneously. There was no standard and concise test to measure the triad prior to the development of the DTDD. Researchers used different personality tests, which makes scoring difficult. In 2010, psychologists Peter K. Jonason and Gregory D. Webster developed DTDD. You can try the interactive version of the dark triad personality test online. Chapter 3: The Art of Manipulation The word manipulation exudes many negative connotations. However, did you know that manipulation could come in a guise that most people do not realized it is actually taking place? Advertising is one of the biggest manipulative guise you can find. Advertising influences the way you perceived things. Product brands employ advertising to influence consumer to switch to their brand by harnessing the powers of influencers like celebrities and other famous personalities. With the advent of social media, influencers extended to blog writers, critiques and other famous social media personalities. Social media personalities are not necessarily celebrities. Popularity is based on the “shares’ and “likes” of their social media pages. The more “likes” and “shares”, the wider the reach. Manipulation then may be defined as intentional attempt by a manipulator to change the target’s behavior through influence with a goal of gaining something in the interest of the manipulator. Types of Emotional Manipulators Emotional manipulation is one of the most effective form of manipulation employed. Here are the most common type of emotional manipulators: The Isolator Manipulator . This type of manipulator employs various kinds of manipulation to control and gain advantage towards their intended victim. The victim is usually someone dependent on them. They befriend the target, making them feel good by lying and telling them distorted versions of truth. At the same time forming an alliance with another group against the target telling them negative things about the unsuspecting target. This effectively isolates the target from other people and thus manipulator gains control of the target. Anger and the need to hurt the target emotionally is usually the motivating factor. The Powerful Victim Manipulator. This manipulator portrays being weak and helpless and always suffering from misfortune. They employ ego stroking and false compliments to gain control of the target. Often, the manipulator will compliment target over his good life and at the same time compare it with the bad things happening in his. This effectively makes the target feel that he is lucky and that he owes the manipulator something for having a better life. However, when their targets do not fall prey to their pretentions, they react to their targets with anger and nastiness. These types only think of themselves and do not care what their actions will affect others. The Masked Windbag. This manipulator has a need to be at the top, the need to be always number one. The style of the masked windbag is not to directly boast about himself but bring down others to lift himself up. He is aware he would be viewed negatively if he brags about himself so he adopts a strategy whereby he would complain about his achievements making the targets feel bad about themselves. He would compare subtly about his advantages over his target making them feel inferior. The masked windbag can complain being unable to wear a small size shirt knowing that the target wears a large or extra large size shirt. The Wolf in Disguise. This type believes that their attractive looks makes them superior to others. They are superficial and shallow and relies on their good looks to get anything they want. They use sex as a tool to gain control of their targets. Breaking up relationships and marriage means nothing to them and in fact, would even brag about it to others. The females portray themselves as “damsels in distress” to trap their targets, while the men would usually portray the “rejected good guy,” They are subtle about using their good looks to gain control. The One way Mirror. This manipulator thinks he is perfect and can do no wrong. They do not take responsibility of the consequences of their action. They blame others for their actions and behavior. They are not out to hurt their targets but rather to find someone to blame. Their usual statement is “Look what you made me do” and this makes the target feel guilty. The Bully. This type of manipulator uses intimidation to get his way. They bully their target to do what they want whenever they asked. Most of the time, they use their physical presence to instill fear through physical aggression or intimidating posture. They feel that it is their right to get what they want and when their intended targets oppose them; they react with aggression and even forced their targets to bend to their will. The Pretentious Innocent. They befriend their intended target to gain information and then slant facts into half truths. They distort the truth to make others perceive what they are saying as the truth about their targets. When confronted, they will appear to be tearful and innocent implying that they must have misunderstood the target’s words. The target would feel remorse and think that they were not clear enough. The Guilt Tripper. This type of manipulator is very common among couples. The manipulator uses guilt and shifts the blame on the target and away from him. A man confronted by his wife about his marital infidelities would deny his wrong doings and instead shift the blame on the wife by enumerating her faults. This undermines the wife’s confidence and make her doubt herself. This type of manipulator manipulates the emotions of the intended target by shifting the blame and thus controlling the target. Personality Traits in Victims There are no offenders if there are no targets. Manipulation does not always work but there are those easily manipulated. Why are others easily manipulated and why others are not? These personality traits are prone to targets of manipulation: : Mind Control — Your Ultimate Terror Mind Control may seem a far fetched idea in the 1950’s but today, it is a concept that is plausible and real. This is the same method employed by the Chinese on American soldiers during the Korean War however; the method was termed “brainwashing.” What is mind control Mind control revolves around the concept whereby actions and thoughts of a person is controlled and manipulated through external forces; attained by physical or psychological means and often includes breaking down the victim until they submit. Once broken down, it reduces the victim’s ability to rationally and independently, changing their beliefs, values and attitude. Mind Control Techniques There are various techniques employed to control one’s mind. Some techniques are used to leverage business, some for relationships, while others are used for daily interpersonal relationships. Here three of the top traditional techniques employed by ordinary people who wish to control another person’s mind. Isolation. This is the classic technique of mind control. The victim is isolated from family, loved ones, and friends. Social contact is limited to non existent. In some religious cults, isolation is usually done in a guise of private seminars in a secluded place. Isolation is also a technique used in domestic violence cases where the victim is not allowed to go out and socialize with family and friends. When they go out, their manipulator is usually with them. Isolation will keep the victim from any influence except those by the manipulator. Criticism. The manipulator instills a “you and me against the world” concept. They lead the victim to believe that everyone outside of the cocoon they are in is against them and only the manipulator has the power to protect the victim. Criticism maybe used as a tool in isolation. If the victim believes that everyone is against them, he or she tends to avoid others, thus effectively isolating themselves. Peer Pressure and Social Proof. Often, most people tend to believe that beliefs, actions and behaviors of others are correct and because majority is doing the same, it is justified. This often works when the intended victims have little faith and belief in themselves, unsure of what to do or how to act. The easiest way for them to feel they belong is to follow and do what the majority is doing. You may scoff off these techniques and would probably ask, who would fall for that but truth is, majority of people fall for it. Admit it or not everyone needs to feel a sense of belonging. Nobody wants to be alone. Often, you do not want to look like a sore thumb sticking out. Fatigue and sleep deprivation is another reason why someone can fall prey to mind control. Modern Mind Control Techniques With today’s technology, mind control is no longer just psychological. Although effects of advertising and propaganda can be reduced, the physical effects developed by military industrial complex is much harder to combat. Here are the top ten mind control techniques in the today’s modern world: 1. Use of Drugs. Most often, these drugs are addictive and the goal is to get you addictive enough to be able to control your mind. Some of the most dangerous drugs used to control the mind includes: e Amphetamine and Methamphetamine can drive a victim to reveal all his secrets. Amphetamine can cause cardiovascular damage. e Sodium Amytal lowers inhibitions allowing the user to talk freely about things buried behind his sub conscious, particularly painful memories he wish to hide or forget. e Ritalin is known as an anti depressant but what most do not know is that it is a powerful drug tool for interrogators because users are known to speak freely and truthfully. e Pipradrol works like amphetamine but without the side effect. The drug induces the user to “tell all” without being prompt. CIA in the 1950’s. Although there is no record of actual use, the drug instill enough fear to induce the victim to “spill the beans” just by threat alone. e Mescaline ; processed from peyote cactus serves as a hallucinogen similar to LSD. The Nazi’s used this in their experiments on mind control and later by the US Navy as a truth serum. However, the use of the drug was a failure. 2. Use of implants such as RFID. This small chip is often use as tracking device for lost items like products, kids, dogs and now introduced in the field of medicine. RFID implants and ingestible is now FDA approved and used as an identification system by Israeli army. 3. Use of gadgets. Computers, tablets, video games, smart devices are just some of the gadgets that have a massive impact on how people now view the world. Marketing content appeals to all three elements of persuasion to convince people to either switch to their brands or remain loyal to their brands. These gadgets when wired to the internet employ applications with subliminal messages that goes directly to the brain. 4. Use of Advertising. Media has been around for such a long time. Traditional marketing was done via print, TV and radio. With the advent of the internet, a new medium was added revolutionizing the way marketers use advertising. A good marketing content can hook potential customers and eventually lead to converts. 5. Use of neuroscience technology. Drones, nanobots, god helmet, robots; these are just of few technological advancements relating to the merging of man and machine. The concept is not new since there have been instances where robotics is use to augment a physical part of the body. What is scary is the thought of this technology merging with the brain. Think of Robocop in the real world. Other mind control methods include: e Persuasion e Covert Persuasion e Deception e Manipulation e Reverse Psychology e Brainwashing e Hypnosis These methods will be discussed in detail in the succeeding chapters. Chapter 5: The Art and Science of Persuasion Manipulation comes in many guises and one of the most subtle form of manipulation is persuasion. Persuasion is a legitimate way of influencing others. What is persuasion Persuasion is an honest way of taking control of the thinking and behavior of the intended victim. Aristotle gave four reasons why everyone should learn the art of persuasion: 1. Justice and truth are perfect; thus, the speaker is at fault if the case is lost 2. It is the best way to teach 3. An excellent rhetorician can argue both sides to fully understand the problem and all options 4. Nothing better you can use to defend yourself Elements of Persuasion The Greeks started the art of persuasion led by Aristotle. In the old days, trials were held in an Assembly and judgment was dependent on the persuasiveness of either defense or prosecutor. Speakers were trained on rhetoric and elocution. Greek Philosopher Aristotle defines rhetoric as “a combination of the science of logic and ethical branch of politics” following his three persuasive elements: Logos, Pathos and Ethos. Logos Logos appeals to logic, reasons, and words in your arguments. Logos employ facts, historical and literal analogies, statistics, citing experts and authorities on the subject of argument. In Logos, your words, reasons, Statistics, citing and analogies are like pieces of jigsaw puzzle that you can put together to construct a logical argument. Your succeeding argument should not contradict your first argument but instead re affirm and support your first argument. Ethos Ethos appeals to ethics. You need to establish your credibility and character; everything you are saying are true and you are not just spouting lies. To develop this by how you speak, what language to use, sound unbiased, using right grammar and syntax, choosing proper level of vocabulary. Learning elocution is a good way of developing ethos. Your pedigree and accomplishments are important factors to consider and you can introduce that without sounding boastful. Pathos The third element appeals to the emotions. In Pathos, invoking the sympathy of your audience is the most important part. You can inspire anger or draw pity from your audience through pathos. Develop pathos by using an emotional tone, through meaningful language, sharing stories and examples that evokes emotions and through implied meanings. Many lawyers employ these three elements to win over an argument. If they have mastered these three elements, they can easily win against their opponent. Modern Persuasion In ancient times, persuasion take form in debates and reasoned arguments. One can hire a sophist to argue for him. Today, persuasion appeals to masses through manipulation of basic human emotion. Just when you think that no persuasion tactic would work on you, but how many can actually say they haven’t been influenced by someone in one form or another. Just look around your home. How many things can you see you bought because you found them on sale? Why did you choose a particular brand for the clothes you wear, the food you eat or even the supplements you take? Methods of Persuasion Various methods of persuasion are often based on basic psychological theories. Persuasion is not just art; it is first and foremast a science. These theories play a huge role in the concept of persuasion. Some of these theories include: e Behavior Change Theory e Attribution Theory e Functional Theories e Cognitive Dissonance Theory e Social Judgement Theory Other psychology theories relating to persuasion are available online. Usage of Force Although force at times is use in persuasion, there is no scientific theory to support it. Its use is only to make demands. When demands are not met, some people employ force to get what they want. This strategy is more of a threat than persuasion because it leaves no option. Weapons of Influence In his book, Influence , Dr. Robert Cialdini listed six science based principles how to make people say yes. He based these principles according to numerous researches in the field psychology. 1. Principle of Reciprocity — Pay back what you receive. The factors to make it successful is by offering something so they feel indebted, make them feel special by offering them something exclusive, and make sure to personalize the offer. 2. Principle of Scarcity — Make things hard to come to make them look special. The principle is made successful based on the premises that what you offer is limited in number, available for a limited time, a unique offer, and there is a sense of clamor for it. . Principle of Authority — Use of a person in authority. Make your offer backed by a person of authority in that field. If you are offering a cream that fights pimples, follow this with a phrase, “research show”, or “according to leading experts”, or anyone who has experience and position of power in the field you are discussing. . Principle of Consistency — People like consistency because it is easier and safer to be consistent than face change. People tend to stay on a committed decision rather than change it. Use these three steps to leverage this principle 1) start by asking for a small action; 2) make them commit publicly; 3) reward them. . Principle of Liking — People tend to follow those they usually like. These people usually share the same beliefs and interest as them. The concept of “word of mouth” endorsement is inspired by this principle. Some businesses leverage this by using a referral program to attract more customers. . Principle of Consensus — Majority wins is the concept behind this principle. Most of often than not, people follow what others normally do. The need to belong is very important in people and if they know that others are doing it, they would normally follow. Persuasion Techniques There are various techniques you can use to persuade someone and convert him to your way of thinking or convince them to help you achieve your goal. Some use punishment, fear, rewards and many others. Below are some of the most effective persuasion techniques. Anchoring bias technique. This is a cognitive bias that is subtle yet powerful in its effect. This works by anchoring the first offer as your basis of decision. Example if you are buying a house, when the agent offers you a 20% cut on the price, you would often agree thinking that you saved 20% when in reality that is the real price of the house. The agent used a higher price as an anchor to hook you into paying the real sale price. Fundamental Need Technique. The technique appeals to your basic needs — food, shelter, love, self actualization and self esteem. How many times have you bought a product because it makes you feel good, young and beautiful? Or how about buying something because a popular person you like is endorsing it? Small Step to Giant Step Technique. The intended target is persuaded to commit into buying or doing something small. Once they have the commitment, it is easy to persuade the target to commit into something bigger. The reverse version of this technique works just as well. Scarcity Technique. When people think something is scarce or limited, the demand becomes higher. Marketers often use phrases “one day sale” or “limited stocks” to create scarcity. Chapter 6: Covert Persuasion Covert echniques You Might Fail To Notice As defined in the Merriam Webster dictionary, covert means veiled or not openly shown. Persuasion is a method used to change the belief, thinking and behavior of the intended victim without resorting to malicious means. What is Covert Persuasion? Covert persuasion are subtle persuasion techniques employed to change the target’s way of behaving and thinking. Most of the time, the target is not aware that persuasion technique is being used on them. Covert persuasion is intentional with the end goal of gaining power and control. Lies, guilt, denial, comparison, complaints, bribe, blames, evasiveness, blackmail, fake concern, sympathy, feigning innocence or ignorance, flattery, apologies, gifts and mind games are just a few of the tools manipulators use as weapons to control their targets without their knowledge. From No to Yes — Why People Say No A person’s instant reaction to questions is “No” and this is due to a past similar incident wherein they made a bad decision. In their book Covert Persuasion , authors Kevin Hogan and James Speakman say 90% of those who reply in the negative experienced a similar situation. Most people tend to remember marked experiences particularly bad ones and its end result. According to sales legend Tom Hopkins there are three conditions why people automatically say “No”, a) The information you gave is not clear to him b) It is not the right time and he needs more time to think over his decision c) Itis not the right moment or there is something keeping him from saying yes. Although persistence pays off, it does not give you license to pester the person. If they say no to you, instead of pestering the person, find out why he is giving a negative answer and move forward from there. Turning No to Yes Rejection is a bitter pill to swallow. Be it in love, personal life, work, or business. Take a salesperson’s sales pitch for example. Even the best sales pitch can yield a negative result, but there are ways you can turn around a “no” into a “yes,” This four step tactic can help you get your desired result. 1. Psyche yourself for a rejection. Do not let it get you down. If you do not take it personally, the rejection will not affect you much. Be prepared with a plan on how you will turn the “no” to a “yes,” 2. So, you received a No. Do not let it end there. When you received a negative answer, do not just give up. Find out why you received a rejection. Try to discover the reason behind it. Do not be content by being passive. 3. Be ready with a preemptive statement. Even before an objection is raised, start with a preemptive statement. You can control the discussion if you start with a preemptive statement and make them forget their objection. 4. Create new opportunities to get an eventual yes. If you have been turned down, find new opportunities that would allow them to say yes to you in the future. If you received a “no”, leave your business card or maybe give them some sort of inexpensive give to help them remember you in the future. These tactics can work not just in business or in sales. You can apply them in your personal life as well. Covert Strategies Covert persuasion is hidden and intentional as discussed earlier. Their aim is control you by putting you on a defensive and make you doubt yourself so that they can get what they want without being confronted, avoid responsibility, and hide their aggression. They employ various strategies to control their intended target. Some of their most typical strategies are: Chapter 7: Covert Emotional Manipulation actics Covert emotional manipulation tactics are among the worst anyone can suffer. The manipulator preys on the target’s emotion until hooked. The target does not realize it even if he or she is already feeling low, ashamed, lacks confidence and self esteem. It is difficult for the target to get out of this kind of manipulation because he or she does not realize it is happening. Here some of the most common tactics you can watch out: e Sharing is caring This tactic is popular in any relationships, be it business or personal. The manipulator will ask you probing questions and allow you to share more about yourself. The information you give allows the manipulator to control your decisions. Examples: “Oh I’ve heard he was not a good boss. How does he treat you?” “Tell me what happened. It will ease up your burden.” e Come into my realm Manipulators wants home court advantage. The feel more powerful being on their own turf. You are at a disadvantage since they claim ownership of that space. Examples: “Why don’t you meet me at the coffee shop across my office? You know your place is too far from me.” “You know I can’t drive that far. Let’s meet in my house instead.” e Distorted truths Manipulators are great at distorting truths. They can alter truths with lies, exaggeration, fibs, or omit information to distort reality. They exaggerate things that would make them look good and understate things that would put them in a bad light. Examples: “I was asking nicely and she screams at me saying I am incompetent. You know I’m right?” “I didn’t sleep a wink thinking about your problem. ” e Red Tape bullying The manipulator burdens the target with red tape, paperwork, procedures or other obstacles that can get in your way of doing things. This usually happens when you draw attention to their flaws by asking questions. Examples: “There is too much paper work involved. Do not bother yourself with it.” “You are just creating a headache for yourself.” e Intellectual syndrome This manipulator position themselves as experts and more knowledgeable than you. They will impose their “so called” knowledge on you making you look inferior. Examples: “T’ve been doing this a long time so you listen to me.” “I know you are new to this so let me explain it to your slowly.” e Your problem is small compared to mine The manipulator makes your issues feel insignificant compared to his. They always want to discuss their own issues to invalidate your emotions and let themselves be the focus. Examples: “You are lucky you have someone, I’ve been alone all my life.” “Are you kidding me? I deal with people like that every day.” e Worming his way out An expert manipulator never takes responsibility of their actions. What they do is turn it around so that it will become your fault and not theirs. Most of the time, you end up apologizing for his own faults. Examples: “I did for you to show you how much I love you.” “If you did not go with my Mother, you could have gone to your son’s football game.” e Playing the Martyr This manipulator makes false promises about helping the target and then make excuses to not follow through on his promise. He would make it appear that keeping his promise would be too much of a burden on him, making you feel guilty for asking help. Examples: “Oh dear, I have too much on my plate at the moment. I simply cannot make the time.” “I know you need my help but I simply cannot do it because I need to take the car for an oil check up.” e “Me too” Syndrome The manipulator does not allow you to take the spotlight. He should always be the center of attention. He would not allow his target to shine and would always find ways to be one up over the target. Examples: “Your presentation was great but I heard another Department Head “wowed” the CEO.” “Congratulations on your son’s award, my two children received the same last year.” e It’s just a joke The manipulator uses veiled sarcasm or jest saying critical remarks. In truth, their statements are designed to plant doubts in the mind of the target. The target perceives this as a joke or when confronted, the manipulator will claim it is just a joke. Examples: “If you avoid those delicious desserts, you won't feel shy about playing beach volleyball.” “Gosh, did you forget to wear make up?” e “Or else” Tactic The manipulator uses ultimatum to control the target. The manipulator uses dramatic statements meant to corner the target and leave the target with no choice but to give in. Often, the target ends up apologizing for causing the argument when it was not even his or her fault in the first place. Examples: “If you don’t work over time this weekend then you are not really interested in that promotion.” “If you leave me, then I have no reason to live.” e Silent treatment This is one of the most effective covert manipulation tactic. The manipulator will ignore the target and cut off all forms of communication. This will agitate and make the target feel worried and doubt herself. The waiting game is one of the hardest thing anyone can go through. e Confusing Denial Manipulators vehemently denies his statements making the target question his memory. Once target becomes confused, they turn around things and put blame on the target. Examples: “That’s not what I said. You must have heard it wrong.” “You know I would never agree to that. Have you forgotten I told you I’m busy that day?” e Opposite reaction Manipulators react opposite of their target’s reaction to make them feel sensitive, particularly during highly strung situations. This makes the target over exaggerating. The target would feel doubts and try to match the manipulator’s reaction to the situation so he or she would not look out of line. Examples: “Do not get too upset, everyone is calm.” “You know that your reaction is a little over the top compared with the others.” Chapter 8: Using Deception Another mind control method manipulators employ is deception or more commonly called lying. What is deception? Deception is a statement or act that hides the truth, misleads, or promotes a concept, idea or belief that is false often done to control or for personal gain. Deception also involves propaganda, dissimulation, camouflage, concealment, and distraction. Deceit occurs in all aspects of relationship, be it business, professional, personal or romantic. It can also be a basis for legal cases or lead to criminal prosecution in the form of fraud. Types of Deception Concealing truths and omitting information becomes a lie when it the intent is to deceive. Anyone can lie by omission or via outright false statements. Some forms of deception includes: e Lying. Issuing statements or giving statements and information, which is far from the truth. e Exaggerations. Stretching or overstating the truth especially if it will make the manipulator look good. e Understatements. Downplaying or minimizing some parts of the truth especially those that can put manipulator in a bad light. e Concealment. Omitting important information to distort the truth or lying by omission. e Untruthful. Misrepresentation of the truth. e Equivocations. Stating ambiguous, contradictory and indirect statements. Motives for Deception Everyone started lying from childhood. Little white lies seemed innocent. Kids do it to get out of trouble. According to psychologist Robert Feldman, “Lying has to do with self esteem. When self esteem gets threatened, people lie immediately at higher levels.” But why do people lie? Here are a few reasons why people lie: 1. People lie to fit in . Acceptance and love are important to people. People rely on acceptance of others to feel good. They would lie about their likes and dislikes, what food they eat, what music they listen to, and so many other things. Even if these things were far from the truth, they would lie about it just so they can fit in with everyone. 2. People lie to avoid consequences. Nobody wants to get in trouble. Lying is the easiest way to avoid consequences of their action. Lying is a convenient tool to avoid consequences. When faced with a sticky situation, lying is the easiest way to get out yourself out of it. 3. People lie to cover awkwardness. It goes with the territory of needing to fit in or to belong. When people feel they are at a disadvantage, they make up stories to make themselves stand out. They would lie about everything from their origins; their school, their job, their wealth, and everything else just to fit and feel a sense of belonging. 4. People lie to get ahead. People will do anything to be on top. This is common in offices and social circles. They would lie to get what they want, or get ahead when the opportunity arises. These people are opportunist who preys on the unsuspecting target. 5. People lie to make others look bad. This is a classic up one man ship. To do this, they would make the target look bad or inferior by either saying bad things about them or creating inferences that others may take into heart. 6. People lie to protect others. 7. Not all lies are intended to deceive. Some lies are done to protect others or a relationship. A husband can lie about meeting an ex to his wife so as not to hurt her feelings. A friend will lie about hour hideous dress because she doesn’t want to hurt you. While it is still deception, the main reason for it is to spare unnecessary pain and preserve the existing relationship. Based on these, you can categorize the reasons for lying in three general categories: 1. Instrumental — The lie helps to protect resources and avoid punishments 2. Relational — The lie helps to maintain bonds and relationships 3. Identity — The lie helps to save face or preserved image. Detecting Deception According to psychologist Paul Ekman, deception detection are investigative practices to determine one’s credibility and truthfulness. Detection is determined through certain physiological and behavioral cues as well as situational and contextual information. The Challenges of Detecting Deception The challenge of detecting deception is the lack of a definitive single sign of the deceit, no facial expression, and twitch of muscle or gesture to prove the person is lying with certainty. Most methods to detect deception today relies on various methods in collecting, analyzing, and interpreting physiological and emotional data. Although, collected data may show emotional clues that may or may not be linked with deception. In his handbook, Mark Frank proposed; you can detect deception at the cognitive level. Lying is a conscious behavior; you need to watch the body language and listen to their speech to help you detect the lies. Watch for responses; if they include repeated words, less talking time, and poor logical structure of statements, the person may be lying. You can also factor in variation and frequency height in vocal cues. Main Components of Deception: Camouflage, Disguise, Simulation Deception is not complete without these three elements: Camouflage Normally, camouflage is use to break up the visual boundary of an object. This involves creating a background that is the same as the color of the camouflaged object or in military wear clothes or items to blend themselves against the background. Manipulators uses half truths or hides information to camouflage the truth. Disguise For famous people, disguise is also known as incognito. People alter their appearance via clothes, make up, and other items they can use to hide their identity. Some can alter their manner of speech to disguise themselves. For manipulators disguise comes in the form of propaganda. They issue proposals that hides its true goal or agenda. Example disguising kidnapping by using the word “protective custody,” Simulation Simulation is imitating an operation or process to see or evaluate the outcome. There are three simulation techniques fabrication, mimicry and distraction. Fabrication is creating something to make it appear like another thing that is actually not. One of the most well known fabrication is the Trojan horse during the Trojan War. Mimicry is similar to camouflage where an object appears the same as another object. A whale may appear like a small island in the middle of water and you will not notice it until it starts moving. Distraction involves giving out information that is opposite of what would actually be done to distract or lead others away from his actual plan. Example, telling her friend that she will wear same color of dress as hers but will wear a different color so she would stand out. Deception Techniques Misinformation Misinformation is creating or inventing false information with the intention to mislead or deceive. The information is usually exaggerated to make it seem or important. The main goal is to diminish its quality and reduce credibility. Often done publicly to ridicule and humiliate the target. A tactic employed to confuse and divert attention over the real issue, create dissent or deliberately use ambiguity to mislead or deceive. Omission This technique is the most pervasive, most insidious and most common form perpetuated. Those who usually employ this technique believes it is not lying if you don’t say anything. This creates a false impression to promote something, which is not true. A high school teen may inform her mother that she is attending a birthday party but not say that the party is for college students. Derailing The manipulator will suddenly switch topics to avoid being cornered with the truth. He or she might pretend offended to take away attention from him or her. This works both ways as the manipulator is egocentric enough to derail conversation to become the focus of attention. Chapter 9: Psychological Manipulation The next mind control method in our list is manipulation, which was initially discussed in Chapter 3. What is manipulation As described in Chapter 3 manipulation is an intentional attempt to change a target’s behavior through influence to gain something. We discussed emotional manipulation in Chapter 3; in this Chapter, we will discuss another form of manipulation — psychological manipulation. Psychological manipulation is a form of social influence with the aim of changing the perception or behavior of others by using deceptive, underhanded or indirect tactics. If the manipulator gains his goals at the expense of another person, this method becomes devious and exploitative. Social influence is not always negative. It is generally perceived as harmless when it does not break the boundaries set by their intended target, unduly coercive. Example, family or friends can use social influence to help target to change bad habits or behaviors. Manipulation vs Persuasion There is no manipulation without using persuasion and persuasion is a form of manipulation. So what is the difference between the two? According to Robert Greene, author of “The 48 Laws of Power”, manipulation and persuasion are the same; any persuasive attempt is an attempt to manipulate. Greene is right but not really 100% right. There are very few who are always honest as much as there are few people that are dishonest and manipulative all the time but it does not mean manipulation and persuasion are the same. with a cost to the intended target; persuasion does not. Techniques of Manipulation Subliminal Manipulation When one speaks of subliminal manipulation, the first thing that comes to mind is the audio back masking of the song “Stairway to Heaven by Led Zeppelin” Audio masking is done by embedding vocal messages that cannot be heard but often when you play the track backwards, it emits a different message. However, subliminal comes in many forms. In fact, some are visible but people are unaware of it. Symbols, scents, fonts and typefaces, sizes, shapes, and colors are subtly embedded with messages that create learned responses and appeals to one’s instinct. Did you ever wonder why yellow makes you feel warm, or why blue calms you? The mind is separated by the conscious and subconscious. The conscious mind evaluates all information it receives then filter all the information the mind wants to receive. The subconscious store all the information filtered by the conscious mind. However, the two cannot work separately. The subconscious cannot filter and evaluate nor can the conscious mind store information long. Unfortunately, it is possible to bypass critical and analytical filters of the conscious mind. But the real key in subliminal manipulation is repetition. Repetition of messages can wear down the filters of the conscious mind, thus stored directly in the subconscious. Once in the subconscious, it creates a learned response or familiarity that turns into acceptance and eventually belief. Blackmail Blackmail is the use of threat or coercion by the manipulator in exchange for his or her silence over damaging information they can reveal about the target; the information may be true or fabricated. Blackmail is also synonymous with extortion; extortion requires exchanging personal property through threat or coercion. Blackmail is a statutory crime in various countries across the world including the Unites States and United Kingdom. Emotional Blackmail Emotional blackmail is a form of blackmail that uses the target’s emotions to control and manipulate target’s way of thinking and behavior. They manipulator appeals to the target’s sense of obligation, fear, and guilt to get his own way. Emotional blackmail is most often subtle but insidious in nature like showing disappointment or withholding affection to the target when he cannot control the situation. There are six stages wherein emotional blackmail progresses according to author and therapist Dr. Susan Forward: 1. The first stage is making a demand. The demand maybe explicit or subtle with the pretext of doing it as a way of caring for you. In reality, it is a way of trying to control you. 2. The second stage is resistance. Target resists the demand by either direct or subtle resistance. The blackmailer will push back against the target’s resistance and will try to wear target down. 3. The third stage is pressure. Once the blackmailer realizes target is resisting, he starts to apply pressure. In a healthy relationship, when one expresses resistance, the other partner either finds an agreeable solution or drops the issue. A blackmailer will find ways to wear down the target’s resistance using guilt, criticism, and demeaning words. 4. If pressure does not work, the blackmailer resorts to the fourth stage, threats. The threats may come in direct and indirect form. Direct threat confrontational and designed to instill fear while indirect appeals to the target’s sense of guilt. 5. Threats works most of the times so you give in. The fifth stage is compliance. Once the blackmailer wears you down, you have no other option but to give in. The blackmailer becomes sweet, loving, nice, and kind and you lower your resistance because you gain peace of mind. You start to wonder why you resisted in the first place. 6. The result of the first five stages; repetition. Once you give, the blackmailer will realize that his tactic worked and will use the Same tactic every time a similar situation comes up. Your mind will be conditioned to the idea that giving in is easier than resisting. Putting down the other person The word belittle comes to mind; the manipulator acts or behave in a way to make the target feel unimportant, small, or inferior. This is one manipulative technique, which is hard to identify because it usually happens in private. The danger of this technique is that the target can start believing that he or she is insignificant and inferior as the manipulator says. Creating an Illusion Black is black and white is white. There are no shades in between. Just as truth is truth and a lie is a lie. Unfortunately, things and situations can get blurry and what seems to be white can tum black and vice versa. So, a lie can be twisted by using an illusion of truth. Remember the subconscious stores information making it familiar in the mind until it becomes the truth. Familiarity is embedded through repetition. What is familiar in the subconscious becomes real even if it is only an illusion. Sometimes the perception of reality is more real than reality itself. Chapter 10: Other Emotional anipulation Techniques techniques discussed in the previous chapter is just scratching the surface. Here are other emotional manipulation techniques designed to divert and silence their targets Projection Manipulation Projection manipulation to put it in layman’s term is simply projecting the manipulator’s perceived flaws and negative emotions to other people so the manipulator won’t have to deal with them. As a result, of this, the manipulator becomes the “victim” or the “righteous one,” Everything that happens to the manipulator is everyone’s fault but never his. Isolation Manipulation Isolation is almost impossible to separate from domestic abuse. Isolation is the most common technique employed in most domestic abuse cases. This is so the manipulator can convince the target that he or she can only rely on the manipulator and no one else.Usually, the manipulator will use various ways to keep the target from having contract with friends and family. The manipulator will either lie or make the target feel guilty just to keep the target away from friends and family. Often, the manipulator will tell target that the target’s family is against the manipulator and wants to keep them apart. The target would believe it to be true and thus effectively isolate the target. Positive Reinforcement In the context of behavioral psychology, reinforcement is a consequence received by any organism (be it man or animal) to build up future behavior whenever that particular behavior is triggered by a specific antecedent stimuli. Reinforcement is either positive or negative. Positive reinforcement happens when the organism is given a desirable stimulus or event because of a particular behavior. Positive reinforcement increases the chances of the organism repeating the same behavior in similar circumstances. Example, a dog gets a treat after he performs a particular trick for you. The treat is the positive reinforcement for your dog increasing the chance of him performing more tricks for you. Negative Reinforcement If there is a positive, there is a negative. In negative reinforcement, the behavior is strengthened when an aversive stimuli or event is prevented or removed from happening. Example, your child asked permission to go out instead of sneaking out and because of this, you no longer ground him or her. The “grounding” is the negative reinforcement that reinforces his bad behavior. Removing the consequence will convince your child that asking permission is the better alternative. Punishment Punishment is applied to reduce the likelihood of a particular behavior from occurring again. There are two types of punishment in behavior learning process, positive punishment or punishment by application and negative punishment or punishment by removal. Negative punishment punishes a behavior by using an aversive stimulus. Example, a child gets “time out” for behaving badly. The “time out” stops when the child apologizes for the bad behavior. The positive punishment is the “time out” which is an unpleasant stimulus. Negative punishment is often related to negative reinforcement because similarly, negative punishment occurs with the removal of a pleasant stimulus, thus reducing the chances of a behavior being repeated. Example, a child refuses to sleep early. The parent takes away a privilege like watching TV before bedtime. The later he sleeps the lesser the chance of his privilege being returned. Watching TV is the child’s pleasant stimulus and taking it away motivates the child to have an early bedtime. Nagging Nagging is a repetitive form of persuasion that manipulators employ as alternative to a more aggressive technique in gaining compliance. The manipulator sets out to gain the target’s compliance by directing the target to perform a specific behavior or task. It is human nature to resist but the manipulator will repeatedly ask the target’s compliance until the target becomes weary. The target will soon find that compliance is a much better prospect than resistance. Yelling Yelling or shouting is an aggressive tactic manipulators employ when they feel that they are about to lose control of the target or the argument. Raising their voice or talking louder is their way of dominating the conversation and intimidating the target in cowering into submission. You can diffuse this by remaining calm and replying in a softer voice. Silent Treatment This technique plays on the emotions of the target. The manipulator subjects the target into a silent treatment making the target feel guilty. The manipulator will ignore the target, which would frustrate the target. Usually occurs in an emotional relationship when the manipulator wants to be in control. The silent treatment often inspires feelings of guilt, doubts, and insecurities in the target and usually ends up giving in to what the manipulator wants. Intimidation Intimidation is not just physical but emotional and verbal as well. Physical intimidation occurs when a manipulator use their size and built to intimidate others smaller than them. A husband can use verbal threats to intimidate his wife into submission. A person who is in higher authority or someone with higher connection can use power to prey on their target’s emotion by instilling fear in them. Intimidation can be direct or covert Traumatic One Trial Learning This technique employs yelling, verbal abuse, explosive anger and other behaviors designed to intimidate the target in order to establish superiority or dominance. Targets turn compliant even if this display only happens once to avoid inciting the same traumatic experience from the manipulator. Manipulation of Facts There are two common ways you can manipulate facts, by outright lying or by omission. Manipulator can alter facts by directly lying to the target and distorting the truth to suit his needs. The manipulator can also omit part of the facts or omit certain words to twist and distort the facts. Manipulation can be positive or negative too. If the manipulator’s intent is malicious, it becomes negative but when it will be for the greater good of the target, it becomes positive. A good example of a positive manipulation of facts is telling your child that visiting the dentist is not a painful experience. Triangulation Manipulation Triangulation employs bringing perspective, opinion, and an outsider suggested threat into an argument. Triangulation aims to validate the manipulator’s behavior while invalidating the target’s response to abuse. The technique works effectively in emotional relationships that leaves the target feeling insecure and unhinged. Often, manipulators use other people’s opinion to enforce their views. Aggressive Jokes This is a covert technique; usually presented as “jokes” to disguise the malicious and appalling words or things the manipulator says. When confronted, the manipulator turn things around by accusing the target of not having any sense of humor. The target is perceived as being “too sensitive” to divert attention from the manipulator’s cruelty and sadistic intent. Chapter 11: Reverse Psychology A Mom who didn’t want her young teenage daughter to have a boyfriend early tell her, “Ok, it’s up to you if you want to marry young, just look at what happened to your cousin.” The daughter did not start dating until she turned 18. Or a wife telling her forgetful husband, “It’s fine if you cannot come home early for dinner. At least I wont have to get tired and just sleep.” The husband surprised her with a dinner reservation at a fine dining restaurant. Do they sound familiar? Everyone at one point in their life is guilty of using this tactic to make their target do what they want even if they say the opposite; reverse psychology. What is Reverse Psychology Reverse psychology is a tactic that involves asserting behavior or belief that is opposite to the desired outcome with the expectation that this approach will persuade the target to do the desired outcome. This tactic depends on the psychological process of reactance. Psychological reactance is a person’s negative emotional response to persuasion and thus reacts the opposite way. How to use Reverse Psychology Reverse psychology is as effective as you utilize it. If you use it often or too obvious about it still boils down to one thing, manipulation. Reverse psychology is often used so much that it becomes second nature. People have a tendency to pull all the stops to make things happen they no longer realize they are doing them. When used in a wrong way, reverse psychology it can turn into something awkward. How would you feel if someone discovers you are trying to manipulate him or her? It can break or scar a relationship or friendship or, just imagine how your conscience will react once you realized how manipulative you have become. Reverse psychology does not affect everyone. Generally, there are two kinds of people — resistant and compliant. Resistant people tend to be jaded; more biased and only see things in black and white. Compliant people tend to follow without question or blowback. If you want to use reverse psychology, you need to know if your target is a resistant or compliant. However, there is this thing called “free will,” They can decide to choose what direction they will go to with their decisions. People learn and change. If you were able to use reverse psychology at one point in their life, it does not mean you can do so again. You may find that who was before compliant has learned his or her lesson and is now more resistant. Here are four simple steps you can follow on how to use reverse psychology in a good way. Step 1 When you want someone to side with you or agree to your idea, plant the seed in their head. Offer them options of that relates to your idea. Example you and your fiancée are planning your wedding. Your fiancée agreed with his Mother to have a blue color themed wedding. While blue is good, you really want a lilac to be your color theme. You cannot offend your future mother in law but it is your wedding not hers. So you drop hints that you want the color to be lilac. Compare the two colors and discuss them with your fiancée. You can show him color swatches in lilac and blue. Discuss how the lilac color suits your skin tone compared to blue. Then tell him you can wear his Mother’s hairpiece with blue stones as part of the “something borrowed something blue,” Just give the options, do not push for a decision. Allow the idea to sink in and do not overwhelm them with so many choices. Just keep it simple. Step 2 Ask your fiancée again about the options you presented. Ask him what he thinks or if he has any suggestions. Drop more hints. Let him hear you discussing with your girlfriends’ about the wedding. How their husbands gave them free rein on what they want for their wedding. Talk to them how you love the idea of having your dream wedding but you respect your mother in law too much and have no wish to offend her. How you would love to have your dream wedding happen but you cannot make the decision alone because it is after all a wedding for two, not just one. Step 3 Go in for the kill. Tell him you are meeting with the wedding planner and finalizing the details for the wedding. You can discuss with him that you have decided to choose blue as your theme and how it will be disrespectful of her not to follow his Mother’s suggestion. Anyway, what is in a color, right? It is just a wish and not all wishes come true. Your fiancée will start to think why he is following someone else’s suggestion and not yours considering that this is your dream wedding. She tells her fiancée “Family is important, you are important to me than my dream wedding.” He will start to feel guilty because he did promise you your dream wedding. Step 4 He suddenly tells you that a lilac theme would look perfect as it suits your skin tone more and it is your favorite color. He would tell you to go ahead, choose the color you want. He would even tell you lilac flowers and candles would look great as decors and suddenly he is giving suggestions as if the color theme is his idea. Reverse psychology can be a powerful tool but you need to use it in a positive way and not as a weapon to take advantage of others. Reverse Psychology tactics Reverse psychology tactics varies, and success depends on who and how you use it. Here are some tactics often used: Reverse psychology on children Children have high reactance tendency and the more headstrong a child; the more susceptible they are to reverse psychology. When your child is contrary using reverse psychology always work however, do not abuse it. When using reverse psychology on your child, challenge them instead of issuing orders. They will want to test you so expect them to challenge your authority. When this happens, keep from being emotional. Offer them options and reward them positively. Lastly, reverse psychology should always be your last option to discipline your child. Reverse psychology on business Product availability is important in business. Visibility is paramount if you want your product to become well known. However, marketers are using reverse psychology as a tactic to make consumers clamor for your brand by making it “limited,” When something is hard to find, the more people want it. Reverse psychology in relationships Reverse psychology is often present in any relationships. Guilt tripping is a common tool employed in using reverse psychology in a relationship. Example, wife wants to go out with her friends, the husband would say sure honey, I am sure you will enjoy their company than staying here at home. The wife would then rethink her decision to leave and instead stay at home. Chapter 12: Brainwashing Brainwashing is the idea that the brain may be controlled or altered, using psychological techniques. Brainwashing can reduce a target’s critical thinking allowing introduction of unwanted and new ideologies; change their values, beliefs and attitudes. Brainwashing is also referred to as menticide, thought reform, mind control, thought control, coercive persuasion and re education. Brainwashing was first used by Edward Hunter in 1950 to give description on how the Chinese government can make it appear that everyone cooperates with them. During the 1970s, a legal and scientific debate ensued on the idea of brainwashing being a mean to convert young people in cults. Steps of the brainwashing process Brainwashing is a process. It cannot happen with just a flick of a finger. Studies have been made regarding brainwashing but one of the most popular was the one made by American psychiatrist and author Robert Jay Lifton who is known for his theory on brainwashing or what he termed as “thought reform,” The following process is based on his study of two French priests subjected to brainwashing. 1. Assault on Identity The manipulator attacks the identity of the person. Take a married couple as an example. A husband telling his wife that she is not a real wife. This can seriously destabilize the confidence of the wife and she will start to question her identity. Losing her identity weakens her values and beliefs making it easier to change. 2. Guilt Tripping The manipulator makes the target guilty of wrongdoing, which eventually leads the target to feel shame and deserving of punishment. The husband blames the wife for her shortcoming further undermining her confidence in her ability to be a wife. 3. Isolation and self betrayal The target is kept in isolation and is forced to denounce family and friends. This reinforces her feeling of guilt and destroys the target’s sense of identity. The husband tells his wife that he needs her at home and hope that she will stay home instead of going out with friends or family. This effectively separates the wife from her old life opening a ground to build a new personality. 4. Breaking Point The repetitive process will eventually wear down the target leading them to break down, similarly to a “nervous breakdown,” They become agitated, fall into a fit of crying and deep depression. Psychologically, they feel that they are losing themselves until they become an empty shell of who or what they are. 5. Small Reward and Leniency When the manipulator realizes that the target is at breaking point, they offer a small measure of kindness. A respite from all the manipulative tactics. Example, the husband will start taking the wife out for dinner dates, bring her flowers or pamper her. During this moment of despair and darkness, the target will feel grateful even if the kindness delivered is from the manipulator. 6. The Need to Give Back The gratitude the target feels is overwhelming. The feel obligated to repay the leniency they received from the manipulator. The target feels the need to confess the guilt and shame created by the assault on the target’s identity. This is the target’s way of repaying the kindness extended by the manipulator. In the example, the wife will feel guilt and shame about putting her husband’s needs before others. She will feel the need to repay this by giving in to his requests and admitting to him that she is wrong. 7. Channeling the Guilt The target will lose sens of what they are really guilty of. All they can feel is the heavy sense of being wrong. They feel confused having lost their self identity. The manipulator uses this guilt to redirect the target; that the target is living in a wrong and bad ideology. The husband will tell the wife that it is not her who should feel guilty but her family and friends who are teaching her wrong things. Only he can give her the love and care that she needs. 8. Reeducation: Throwing Old Ideology The target will start to believe that the guilt stems from wrong beliefs imposed by external influences. They will accept this reasoning to justify the guilt and shame they feel to the point that will reject their old beliefs and ideologies. The wife will start avoiding family and friends and instead will choose to stay with her husband. She will shun them and will not accept any reasoning. 9. Reeducation: New Ideology Rejecting old ideologies will leave a hole that would allow acceptance of new ideologies. Since the new ideologies are opposite of the old one, it is easy for manipulator to convince the target to accept it. Reeducation will be easier by presenting the new ideologies as suitable and harmonious to the target. The husband tell the wife that her friends and family are trying to put a wedge between them, which is not good especially if they are trying to build a family. 10. Rebirth Faced with the prospect of an attractive ideology, the target lets go of the old ideology and accepts the new one. To the target, it would feel like a rebirth. Usually, acceptance would include a ritual where the target embraces the new ideology and swearing allegiance to the manipulator. In cults, this is made symbolic by performing symbolic acts. The wife promises the husband obedience and to always listen to him. She promised to follow whatever he wants to the point of submission. Common techniques used in brainwashing In brainwashing, the manipulator aims to change the target’s thoughts and beliefs in a 360 degree manner. Here are top three most effective brainwashing technique employed by manipulators: Chapter 13: Hypnosis In 1820 mesmerism practitioner Etienne Félix d'Henin de Cuvillers coined the words hypnosis and hypnotism derived from the neuro hypnotism or nervous sleep . The term hypnosis comes from the Ancient Greek word “hypnos” , which means “sleep” and the suffix “osis,” But what is hypnosis in the psychological sense, and why is it one of the most common form of mind control? The English version of the words were made popular by Scottish surgeon James Braid. What is hypnosis It was Braid who gave the earliest definition of hypnosis. He described hypnosis as a “status of mental concentration that that often turns to a progressive relaxation mode, which he called nervous sleep.” In 2005, the American Psychological Association (APA) through the Society of Psychological Hypnosis Division 30 provided a new definition of hypnosis. According to APA hypnosis involves an explanation and purpose of the procedure. Hypnosis is used to encourage and evaluate reactions to suggestions. A person (usually the subject) is guided by a practitioner (the hypnotist) to respond or react to suggestions for alterations in perception, emotion, sensation, thought or behavior and changes in subjective experience. Hypnosis generally happens if the subject reacts or responds to the suggestions. Induction Hypnosis is usually preceded by using a “hypnotic induction” technique. Old school viewed it as a way of subjecting the subject into a hypnotic trance but subsequent interpretations see it as way to heighten subject’s expectation. There are several induction techniques employed; the most influential is Braid’s “eye fixation” technique or “Braidism,” Variations of “eye fixation” technique were later developed but Braid’s technique remains to be the most autoreactive. Suggestion Braid did not use the word “suggestion” when he described hypnotism but referred to the act of centering the conscious mind on a single foremost idea. His main therapeutic strategy includes reducing or stimulating physiological functions in different areas of the body. In his subsequent works, Braid increased focus on the use of various verbal and non verbal modes of suggestions. However, Hippolyte Bernheim switched the focus from the physical to the psychological process. Bernheim defined hypnotism as an induction of an unusual psychical condition that increases susceptibility to suggestion. Susceptibility Braid termed two stages of hypnosis that he referred to as the first and second stages of consciousness. Later on, he changed this into three hypnosis stages whereas the first is referred to as the “sub hypnotic” stage, the second one as the “full hypnotic” stage, and the last one as the stage of “hypnotic coma.” An analogous distinction was raised later on by Jean Martin Charcot that he referred to as “somnambulism,” “lethargy”, and “catalepsy,” However, a more intricate hypnotic “depth” scale based physiological, behavioral and subjective responses from direct and indirect suggestion were introduced by Ambroise Auguste Liébeault and Bernheim. It wasn’t until early 20" century that early clinical “depth” scale was replaced by more advanced scales of “hypnotic susceptibility” based on new research and experiments. Applications Applications for hypnosis expands across various fields of interest, including military uses, psychotherapeutic/medical uses, entertainment and self improvement. Although the American Medical Association has no official stand on its medical use, a study published by the Council on Mental Health of the same institution documented the value of hypnosis in the clinical settings. Artists employed hypnosis for creative purposes. It has been also used in education, physical therapy, forensics, rehabilitation and sports. Self hypnosis is popular among smokers who want to quit, weight loss, alleviate anxiety and stress while stage hypnosis can help persuade subjects to perform unusual feats publicly. Hypnotherapy Hypnotherapy is used in psychotherapy to treat disorders such as anxiety, sleep disorder, eating disorder, compulsive gambling, depression and post traumatic stress. It has also been used as alternative to chemical anesthesia. Some studies also showed that hypnosis could help aid in pain management in dental surgery, cancer treatments, childbirth, and burn treatment. Military Applications There is no evidence that shows hypnosis is used for military applications. According to a declassified document from the US Freedom of Information Act archive, using hypnosis in intelligence can cause certain technical problems not normally encountered in a laboratory or clinic. Obtaining compliance from a resistant subject would require essentially hostile circumstance. There is no evidence showing this is possible. Self hypnosis As the word suggest, this occurs when someone hypnotizes oneself by using autosuggestion. Self hypnosis is used to help increase motivation to quit smoking, for a diet, or reduce stress. Using self hypnosis sometimes requires the use of devices like the “mind machines” while others use hypnotic recordings. Stage Hypnosis Stage hypnosis is more of an entertainment usually conducted in theatre or club in front of an audience. In stage hypnosis, the hypnotist usually attempts to hypnotize the audience and then select different subjects supposedly “under” his control to join him on stage. The hypnotist then ask these subjects to perform embarrassing acts. However, the effects of stage hypnosis is probably due to suggestibility, participant selection, physical manipulation, the desire of the subject to be the center of attention rather than real hypnosis. Types of Hypnosis Traditional Hypnosis In traditional hypnosis, the subject is placed in a deep relaxed state before hypnotic suggestions into the subconscious. This is the easiest hypnosis technique but it is not effective to highly analytical subjects. Ericksonian Hypnosis Ericksonian hypnosis, name after Dr. Milton Erickson uses metaphors instead of using direct suggestions in his hypnotic approach. This approach lets the mind to approach a problem in a more organic way. Most effective to highly critical and logical subject. Embedded Technique This covert hypnosis technique is one of the most powerful and most effective. An expert hypnotist can layer messages deep within normal conversation without using direct messages and without the subject realizing it. NLP (Neuro Linguistic Programming) Neuro Linguistic Programming is the most advanced hypnosis technique and should only be done by a highly trained hypnotherapist. It is used to treat severe additions or severe problems by brain programming. Effective on subjects who have severe addictions. Video Hypnosis Video hypnosis are pre recorded messages and videos they ask subjects to watch. This is effective for those who wish to induce self hypnosis. Subliminal Hypnosis Subliminal hypnosis is covert hypnosis. The subliminal message goes directly to the subconscious. The brain’s subconscious cannot filter messages and through repetition, the messages are embedded into the subconscious until it becomes familiar and acceptable. Chapter 14: Covert Hypnosis 7 Á Covert means hidden. Hypnosis is using suggestions repetitively to alter one’s perception, emotion, sensation, thought or behavior. What then is covert hypnosis? What is covert hypnosis As introduced earlier the mind is made of the conscious and unconscious or subconscious part. The conscious mind is the filter while the subconscious is the storage and has no capability to filter all and any information presented to the mind. However, it is possible to reach the subconscious directly. Covert hypnosis attempts to do this by attempting to communicate directly with the subconscious. The idea is to slip in suggestions into the subconscious without the knowledge of the subject. Suggestions are made in regular conversations, which is why covert hypnosis is also called “conversational hypnosis,” This term is widely used in NLP or Neuro Linguistic Programming. More on NLP in another chapter. There is a debate whether covert hypnosis works because standard hypnosis usually requires attention and focus of the subject. To do this, one is aware that hypnotism is taking place. In covert hypnosis, the subject is unaware hypnotism is taking place. Covert hypnosis uses fatigue and confusion to hypnotize. When the subject is in fatigue, critical thinking is affected making it easy for the manipulator to use suggestions to influence their thinking. Covert hypnosis techniques Expert hypnotists can execute covert hypnosis with ease and without the intended subject knowing about it. Covert hypnosis becomes successful when the subject follows the hypnotist’s command without thinking that they are under hypnosis. In the wrong hands, covert hypnosis can prove to be fatal. It would probably take years before you can master covert hypnosis but here are some easy techniques you can follow: Deception Technique To execute covert hypnosis, the hypnotist use deception by lying or distorting truth to trigger a response from the subject. They hypnotist’s goal is to create a bond with the subject to earn their trust. Once they have the subject’s trust, they use suggested comments so the subject believes the illusion the hypnotist created. Eye Cues Technique “Your yes are the windows to your soul. ” Covert hypnotists use this old adage to their advantage. During covert hypnosis, hypnotists’ look at their subjects straight to the eye and use their eye cues to know what they are thinking. A person can reveal a lot with the how their eyes move or respond to a particular question. A person’s eye movement can reveal a lot of their thoughts. Cold Reading Technique Cold reading technique involves making the subject or subjects believe the hypnotist can read their minds. You can accomplish this by using tactics like suggesting vague statements; depending on the subject’s response would subtly change their statement making it appear the hypnotist can read your mind. Hot Reading Technique This technique is one of the most potent covert hypnosis technique. The hypnotist uses observations and statements designed to shock and amaze the subject with its genuineness and explicit nature. This is only possible if the hypnotist has prior knowledge or acquired knowledge about the subject. Sub modalities Technique In this covert hypnosis technique, the hypnotist studies the variations of the subject’s response to different questions or scenarios. The hypnotist chooses his words carefully with the aim of triggering a response in a specific context. He can either refines his words or use them again to elicit the emotions he needs from the subject. Misdirection Technique This covert hypnosis technique is very popular among magicians. The object of this technique is to divert the attention of the subject from the hypnotist’s real intent by embedding thoughts that would distract the subject’s attention. To do this, the hypnotist repeats the same words in a different context so the subject will not analyze the words too deeply. Non Direct Conversation Covert Hypnosis Techniques Other covert hypnosis techniques do not require direct conversation. Hypnotist can induce hypnosis using the following techniques without using conversation: e Use of relaxation and meditation. When you are relaxed and under meditation, your conscious mind relaxes. When the conscious mind is relaxed, the subconscious mind takes over allowing you to communicate with your unconscious mind. e Use of brainwave synchronizer. Often use by clinicians and dentists, this electronic device is a simple flashing light so the subject will not know the hypnotist used it. e Use of olfactory. The scent of a person, your favorite food, the smell of your favorite places affects your mood or emotional state. The scent can trigger strong emotions that can be of effectively use in hypnosis. e Use of video recordings. A recorded video of a person being hypnotized can induce hypnosis to another subject watching it. The tempo and tone of your voice are very important tools in covert hypnosis. The differences in your vocal sound can help you control your subject. You can master this by training yourself through voice training programs. Conversational Hypnosis Conversational hypnosis happens naturally on a daily basis. When one speaks of hypnosis, the first that comes to mind is one of those Hollywood movies where the person hypnotized goes in a “trance,” Trance is when one connects to the unconscious mind. Body functions like digesting food, falling asleep and breathing are all controlled by the unconscious mind. However going on a trance is more than what you would normally see in a movie. Skilled hypnotists can induce “trance” and make you change just using a regular conversation. You can say then that conversational hypnosis is a systematic and scientific method of inducing a trance using regular conversation. According to the Hypnosis Training Academy, there are three elements to a successful conversational hypnosis: Chapter 15: Dark Psychology Tricks and Tactics } Compiled in this chapter are ten of the most common and simplest tricks and tactics that you can use to get ahead or gain advantage over someone or something. Not all of these tricks are evil but they can help give you an edge in life, relationship and work. Silence with Eye Contact One trick to get information from target is from eye contact. When asking details from your target, gauge how they respond to you. If you feel that you are not getting full information, ask a question then remain silent for a few seconds while maintaining eye contact with the target. This will make them uncomfortable and would do anything to break the awkwardness even if it means giving out more information than intended. Continue the silence and they are more likely to continue to talk. The Lurker Detector If you are a target of a stalker or if you feel as if someone is watching you, you can find out who it is with a simple psychological trick. Yawn. It may sound weird but yawning is contagious. Watch someone yawn and see if you find yourself yawning. Even reading or saying the word “yawn” is enough push you into doing the action. To catch your stalker, make sure that everyone around you see you yawn. After yawning, turn and look around and watch the people around you. If you see anyone yawning, you will find out who is watching you. Nodding Act Making a person agree with what you are saying is not easy but using a simple psychological trick as “nodding” your head can turn around someone opposing your view. The “nodding” of head can make someone believe your statements and thus, will most likely start to nod as well and agree. However, be careful, as this trick does not work on everyone. Aim High This trick is common in business transactions. When you a real estate agent wants to close a sale, they would usually price the property at a ridiculously high price. Of course, the target will negotiate until the target feels that it he or she was able to negotiate a good discount. In truth, the price they settled on is the real price of the property. Another trick is to offer a high price and when they say no, offer the real amount. The target will usually feel bad for saying no a second time after you gave a big discount and will most likely accept your lower offer. Worn Out Fatigue can wear down a target. If you want to get easy compliance from your target, do it when you know they are tired and worn out. Fatigue can deplete both mental and physical energy leaving the target vulnerable and easy prey. This trick is effective when kids try to wheedle additional allowance from their parents who just got home from a tiring day. Fatigue can wore out a person physically and mentally; robbing them of their ability to make rational decisions and the target finds it easier to give in than argue. Mimicking Mirror This technique involves copying another person’s speech and body language. According to research, copying someone’s body language can make the person subconsciously identify with you; they are more likely do what you want. People tend to establish easy rapport when they see similar attitudes, actions, and speech patterns towards another person. It makes them think you are in sync with them and will trust you more. However, do not be too obvious when mimicking because it can put them off. Paraphrasing One of the most effective technique to convince a target that you are really listening and understanding them is by paraphrasing their words and say it back to them. Counselors call this communication technique as reflective listening. This makes your target feel that you are into them and would open up easily to you. However, be careful about doing this often because it can work against you. The Name Game Have you ever felt offended when people do not remember your name? A person’s name is the most important word to anyone. A person’s name is the bane of his existence and hearing it validates your identity as a person. It makes the person hearing it feel that they are respected and important. This establishes rapport and trust allowing the person to be friendlier. Example, two managers asked their janitor to clean their office. One manager told the janitor “please make sure to clean the room” while the other manager said, “John, please make sure to clean the room.” Which office do you think John will clean first? The Science of a Smile Charles Darwin discovered that a smile can serve as manifestation of happiness and can help connect with other people. A smile is contagious, when you see someone smiling at you, you cannot help but smile back. A smile can make a person feel more at ease and comfortable. It makes them feel that they can trust you. However, there are instances when smiling is inappropriate like if you are discussing a death in the family. This may not be the best time to smile. Door in the Face This is a well known social psychology technique, which employs the rule of reciprocity. The idea is to ask a huge request to the target knowing that they are most likely to say no. Then follow this up with a more reasonable request and ensure they make a commitment to fulfill that request. The principle of reciprocity makes it harder for a person to say “No” a second time especially if they feel a favor was done for them, in this case the scale down version of the request. Example, you ask a friend if he or she would be willing to join a fund raising campaign for the homeless. This is a huge request of their time, money, and effort that your friend will most likely turn down. So you ask instead, if he or she can sponsor a meal for one homeless person. Dark Psychology Vol. 2 By PSYCHOLOGY ED ACADEMY & CARL GOLEMAN Contents — Dark Psychology Vol. 2 Chapter_1: Non Verbal_ Communication Body_Language and Common Gestures What is Body Language The Origins of Body Language Non Verbal Communication — Appearance and Sounds Sounds Proteomics or Distance/Space Communication through Action Symbols Emotional Undertones of Words Non Verbal Communication — Body Language in Life Situations Body Language For Seduction Body Language Techniques For Public Speaking Effective Body language Techniques and Tips for Teachers / the Classroom Chapter 2: Cold Reading What is cold reading Cold Reading ‘Techniques How to use cold reading Social Scalper Chapter 5: Dark Psychol the Male Dark. a five Bonboi Chapter ye Dark es In aes TN ee fa EEEE Chapter 8: Dark Psychology_In Politics During campaigns Once in power ark Psychology_In Groups Ta Group Tactics The Nazi Sala Noi oise as tals Varfare Dark Psychology_on the Air Master and Servant Veiled Threat and Guilt Tripping The Blamer Playing Indifferent r 12: Gaslighting What is Ga ee Chapter 1: Non Verbal Communication Body anguage and Common Gestures Non verbal communication is a wordless communication usually expressed either overtly or covertly through appearance , sounds and body language . What is Body Language Body language is one of the three elements of non verbal communication expressed through physical behavior such as gestures, body posture, eye movement, facial expression, use of space and touch. Body language is not a language that has grammar like the spoken words or like sign language. Body language is an interpreted meaning that corresponds with a particular movement or gesture. Interpretation varies from one country or culture to another. The Origins of Body Language The history of body language dates back as far as the Stone Age when waving and grunting was enough to understand one another. Many of the gestures and non verbal communication studies came from prime apes who first used gesticulations to communicate. The first to study about body language and its origin is none other than the Father of Evolution, Charles Darwin. In his book “The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals”, he set the science behind body language and many observations and studies today are based on his studies. In his observation and findings, he noticed the similarities of inborn behavior between animals and humans. However, major studies of body language started in the 60s and since then it became a subject of study in the fields of social science, psychiatry, business, and anthropology. There is no real communication face to face or otherwise without body language. Even when you are just speaking over the phone, you make gestures while conversing even if the person on the other end does not see you. Both non verbal and verbal communication complements one another. Reading and Understanding Body Language Eyes The eyes, they say is “the window to your soul,” How your eyes move, convey a lot of meanings. Blinking Most often, blinking suggests deceitfulness or dishonesty but not necessarily true in some cases. Blinking can also suggest that worry, fear, uncomfortable, or going through something difficult. Pupil constriction and dilation Eye pupils usually dilates when a person feels positive or attracted towards someone or something. But, not in all cases. Your pupils dilate as a reaction to the stimulation of the nervous system so your pupils will also dilate in anger or fear. Your pupils constrict when you have feelings of dislike or disgusted towards something or someone; sometimes accompanied by squinting of the eyes or narrowing of the eyes. Whatever reasons for your pupil size, the thing to remember is your pupils dilate in response to anything positive and constrict in response to anything negative. Hands, Arms and Legs Hands, arms, and legs gestures are usually used to emphasize a point but there are instinctive gesture of these body parts that reveal many emotions. Crossing the arms against the chest Crossing the arms usually indicates defensiveness. Another perception is that the person disagrees with another person’s actions or opinions. Some people cross their arms as a sign of anxiety or vulnerability. However, crossing the arms can also mean a sign of confidence especially if accompanied by a smile or a relaxed posture. Steepling Placing the fingertips together or “steepling” shows control or authority. If you will notice, most bosses or person of authority uses this gesture. This gesture is useful if you are in a business meeting, presenting a proposal or in an interview. When the person of authority makes this move, it shows that he is confident things are going in his favor. Example, if the interviewer uses this gesture, it tells you he is confident he has found the right person for the job. However, this action is not all positive. If the hand gesture comes with his palms closed, leaning back on his chair, and shaking of his head then in it spells negative. Take note though that in card games, this action is a positive response. Legs apart stance This standing leg position is a usually seen predominantly in males, particularly in military men. A person using this stance is telling the world that he is standing his ground, immovable, resolute, and dominant. This is the opposite of the parallel leg stance where both feet are placed closely together, showing subordinate position. Facial Expressions/Facial Gestures Facial expressions or gestures are the result of how a particular emotion affects your face. It is not hard to recognize basic human emotions but the muscle movements of your face can be telling. Here are three of the most basic emotion humans feel and how it affects their facial muscles. Happiness or Joy When you smile, the eyebrows are lightly raised creating light wrinkles on your forehead despite its relaxed state. The corners of the mouth curls up and sometimes shows your teeth. A loud laugh would have the mouth open and the cheekbones lifted; the outer corner of the eyes show wrinkles. Anger The teeth are showing and the lips forms in a snarl; corners of the mouth depressed. The eyebrows push together; nose is wrinkled and nostrils flaring. The eyes bulges putting tension on the eyelids. Sadness The comers of the mouth is depressed; lower lip shaking. The brows squashed together with a frown on the forehead. The skin around the eyes pulled and tearing up or crying. Wrinkles form around the corner of the mouth to the nostrils. Breathing Patterns People’s breathing patterns differ depending on their mood. A long deep breath usually indicates relief, anger, or fatigue. A slow breath indicates thoughtfulness or a state of calm. A fast breath usually happens when you are under positive stress (excited) or negative stress (worried, anxious, nervous). Torso and Posture Posture is the way you hold yourself and it is difficult to read because controlling your body posture is not easy. Still, it can shed insight when it is not how you usually carry yourself. Some examples to watch: e Leaning your torso against any support indicates disinterest or boredom. e Stand straight; hands_on the side shows openness and willingness to listen and engage. e Tilting _the body or the head to one side indicates concentration and interest. It can also indicate attraction depending on other body language indicators. Mouth and Lips Not all smiles are happy smiles. Each kind of smile holds a different meaning just like the way your lips move. A genuine smile would turn the corners of your mouth up accompanied by the narrowing of the eyes and wrinkles at the corner. An insincere or fake smile would not normally involve the eyes. It usually happens as a reaction to a discomfort. A smirk or half smile following an expression of contempt or displeasure may suggest disdain, uncertainty, or dislike. The movement of the lips can suggest different statements, a quivering lip suggest sadness or fear, a pursed lip can indicate disagreement or anger, and compressed lips suggest unease. Fidgeting and Movement Patterns Fidgeting is restless moving in a way that is not necessary to an ongoing event or task. Fidgeting is a label for unconscious postural movements people perform while standing or seating. Fidgeting results from agitation, excitement, boredom, nervousness, ADHD or combination of all these. Some examples of signs of fidgeting: e Shaking a pen while thinking e Twirling a ring or necklace e Tapping a foot. Non Verbal Communication — Appearance and Sounds Body language is not limited to body parts movements and gestures. A person’s appearance, hair color, make up, tone, sound of voice and even silence can also convey a message without using words to a receiver. Appearance A person’s appearance can convey a statement. When talking about appearance, it is not limited to physical beauty, height, skin color, weight, and body shape. The clothes, cosmetics, hairstyle, and accessories worn by person can speak volumes. The totality of a person’s appearance conveys visual clues to their age, personality, interest, style, sex, social standing, attitude; religious and political affiliations. The Body The human body is the most beautiful yet most complex of God’s creation. A person’s overall appearance and body conveys a view of one’s self to others. People spend a high amount of concern and mental energy towards their physical appearance because interpersonal relationships are mostly grounded on the degree of attraction towards physical appearance. Physical Features Physical features of a person conveys different meanings. As a chubby child is looked upon as “cute” whereas a chubby teenager is considered “fat,” The shape of a person’s body also holds different meanings. A woman with right curve proportion or a man with a six pack abs is considered “sexy” while a reed thin woman maybe be thought of as “bulimic,” Paleness vs Blushing The face reddens when a person blush. It is usually involuntary and triggered by embarrassment, passion, romantic stimulation, anger, or shyness. Paleness is the opposite of blushing. Paleness is often associated with fear, shock, nausea, or an illness like anemia. The Accessories Clothes and accessories people wear is also saying something. The type of clothes and color of clothing a person wear can tell about kind of personality he has. Some clothes also speak of the type of work they do. Accessories can also include jewelries, tattoos, piercings, cigarette, glasses and make up all convey a secret sign Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make up e When a person puts one side of his eyeglass frame at the corner of his lips the person is needing reassurance. This gesture also means the person is stalling or delaying a response. e A person wearing eyeglasses is often perceived as studious and intelligent. e A person can also intimidate another person by peering over his or her eyeglass e Women wearing make up looks more credible, particularly career women. e Make up makes women look confident and sexy. Bold and bright lipstick is okay on a date but more understated in business meetings. e Cigars are used to display power and superiority. e Women used cigarette as a sexual display and attract men. e Cigarette smoke blown up; positive, superior, and confident e Cigarette smoke blown down; suspicious, negative, secretive Sounds Audio communication or audible communication is message conveyed with the use of sound. This is an important means of non verbal communication. Example, in a movie, an ominous sound in the background usually signifies danger, a sound of thunder means rain follows. Even the sound emitted by people like moaning and groaning conveys meaning. + Touch This is the first silent or non verbal form of communication that humans learn. Touch can convey a wide range of emotions. When a baby is born, the Mother’s first touch conveys safety and comfort. Proteomics or Distance/Space Distance or space is a powerful way of conveying a message. The study of how to communicate with distance or space is called Proteomics. In a work environment, space indicates importance and position of a person by observing spaciousness and location of their office. Communication through Action Ever heard of the old adage “Action speaks louder than words.” A person’s action is another form of silent or non verbal communication to convey a specific message or meaning. A person’s nature, habit, desire, likes and dislikes can be revealed through his actions. Example, a person who always arrives on time shows his punctuality and dependability. Symbols Symbols is another silent form of communication. People use symbols and signs as representations of the message one needs to convey to the viewer. Example, A cross symbolizes churches, “V” sign means victory, “X” for prohibition or in mathematics it means multiplier, and cross bones on top of a skull signifies danger. Emotional Undertones of Words “It is not what you said but how you said it.” If someone says that to you, it is most likely that you used paralanguage. Paralanguage refers to the intonation of your voice accompanied by your words. In paralanguage, the vocal aspect of communication emphasize how the words were said rather than the words itself. Paralanguage can be an effective tool if use positively but if used negatively, it can cause hurt and conflict. The most common body language gestures you will see daily Here are five body language gestures most commonly seen: Non Verbal Communication — Body Language Tips and Tricks In this sections you will find various tips and tricks on how you can leverage body language effectively. It has been said that body language accounts to 60% of what a person communicates so learning to read non verbal cues can be a powerful tool in your daily communication. Here are five of the most powerful body language tips: 1. Adopt a power pose to boost self confidence. If you notice most men in uniform stands straight, feet apart and their hands either behind them or on their hips with the arms spread like butterfly wings. This is because they want to show power and dominance. A research suggests that making your body expansive can stimulate higher levels of testosterone and lower levels of stress hormone, cortisol. . Shake hands to connect with people. Touch is oldest non verbal cue everyone learned by any individual. In a social scenario, you convey touch through a handshake. A firm handshake leaves an impression of confidence and trustworthiness to people. . To illicit good feelings, give a genuine smile. People tend to smile back when you smile at them. No matter what they are feeling, when someone smiles at them they cannot help but smile back. A real smile will show on the entire facial expression of a person and not just on his mouth. . Listen to encourage participation. To get more people to participate focus on them and not on other things. Show that you are listening to them by turning your body to face them or by making eye contact. Employ other non verbal cues that show you are listening to them. . Remove defensive barriers to improve relationship. Take away any physical objects you may be holding or placed in front of you to make you look more open. You can improve relationship and encourage teamwork if there is nothing to obstruct you and your team. How to use body language to your advantage Now you know high level what different body language cues you can employ, it is time to learn how you can use them to your advantage. 1. Practice the power posture. Fill space and open your body. The more space you take, the more powerful your posture. Studies suggest that power postures can help boost self confidence. An example, if you are standing, stand with feet apart with your hands placed on your hips. Practice doing the power stance in front of a mirror and help boost your belief in your own abilities. 2. Be mindful of your tone of voice and facial expression. Your facial expression and tone of voice is just as important as your body movements. A smile is contagious. Even when a stranger smiles at you, you cannot help but smile back. A smile can evoke positive feelings in a person. It is the same with your tone of voice. Research suggest that when you speak in a low tone pitch, you feel more powerful. If you behave as if you really feel positive and confident, you are more likely to feel actually confident and positive. 3. Gesturing when you speak. Gesticulation is an unconscious behavior for most and others view it as a quirk but research proves that gesticulation can aid in the mental process. Can you imagine watching a presenter who just stands still? Do you think you will be impressed with the presentation? Gestures help your audience not only understand but remember what you are saying as well. The key is to make sure that your gestures are related to your words. 4. Avoid using handheld devices. A new research at Harvard University showed that people who uses laptops or desktops are more assertive than those using handheld devices like tablets and mobile phones. This is because handheld devices keeps a person in a constricted posture as compared to a bigger device where you have an open posture. Manipulative Body Language Deciphering intentional body language is easy. If someone rolls their eyes or stomps their foot will give you a good idea of what they are feeling. However, some people are good at using subtle body language to manipulate you and get what they want. Falsifying Non Verbal Communication A gesture, a movement, a smile and other gesticulations may seem normal actions to an untrained eye, but an individual’s body language maybe telling a different story than you know. Here are some common non verbal cues that people can subtly use to manipulate you: Smile A smile is a powerful non verbal cue. When a person smiles at you, your instinct is to smile back and it disarms you. What you need to observe is whether the smile is genuine or fake. A genuine smile will engage the whole face from the lips to crinkling of the eyes. A fake smile only engages the mouth. However, a fake smile will try to convey approval or pleasure but actually has a different meaning behind it. Example, when a person touches the lips while speaking maybe an indicator that he or she is lying. Mirroring Another word for mirroring is mimicking. When you are speaking with someone, watch if the person mimics your movements. Normally, when a person wants to establish rapport with you, he mimics your behavior. Example, when you take a sip of your drink, he will do the same gesture or try resting your elbow on the table and wait to see if the person will do the same. Manipulators use this technique to make you feel at ease by showing that there is commonality between you. Nodding Nodding is one of the most powerful non verbal cue that a manipulator can use to gain what they want from you. When you nod your head, it is an indication of patience or lack thereof. When a person nods slowly, it indicates the person is agreeing with you or interested in what you are saying and would like you to continue. If the person is nodding fast, it shows his boredom or has had enough and would like you to either finish or give him or her a chance to speak. The manipulator can use how you nod to leverage on how he should proceed. Standing You can get clues on an individual’s feelings or mood from the amount of physical distance that separates you. Although some people are not comfortable standing close to another person, there are those who are used to standing at a lesser distance. When a person stands very close to you indicates that he or she likes you and enjoys your company while those who stand at some distance from you feels the opposite. A manipulator will often ignore space boundaries to put you in a defensive mode without you realizing it. Leaning Leaning may seem a casual movement from a person feeling cramp but body language can tell you otherwise. Posture is hard to read because it is not easy to control but certain behavior can give telltale signs of what is really inside the person’s mind. Leaning backward on a chair or any back support when speaking with someone can indicate disinterest or boredom while leaning forward towards someone suggests otherwise. Use your feet The feet are the most overlooked part of the body when it comes to body language. People generally focus in controlling their upper body positioning and facial expression they do not realize they are unintentionally revealing non verbal cues with their feet. One good example is the direction of where the feet is pointed. People will normally point their feet in the direction of where they want to go whether they are standing or sitting down. Again, like nodding, manipulators can use the feet to their advantage. An individual with vested interest can use this technique to gain your attention. Detecting deception in Body Language You can tell a person is lying by watching his body language. Here are some non verbal cues to indicate deception: e Fidgeting e Involuntary bodily functions like growling stomach, sweaty brows, or jittery hands e Using obstructions like books, coffee cup or any other objects e Hand gestures are made after the spoken words and not before. Non Verbal Communication Body Language in Life Situations Body language is a powerful tool to enhance your social interactions, confidence, mood, and how you feel about your surroundings when used in a positive manner. Here are some tips on how you can use body language in your life situations. Body Language Tips For Your Interview If you are going for a job interview, body language can help you nail that job if you know how to use it to your advantage. Here are five body language tips you can practice before going for your next interview: e Appearance gives an overall impression so make it count. Wear appropriate clothes. Keep your hair neat and tidy and for the women, do not wear too loud make up. Keep it to a minimum. You want to give off the impression that you are confident, intelligent and reliable. e Hand Shake is most likely the only physical contact you will have with your interviewer. If you sweat a lot, make sure your palms are dry before you shake hands. Sweaty palms is a sign of nervousness. Make the handshake firm, not too tight and not too loose. When you shake hands, maintain eye contact with the interviewer and smile. e Posture and Sitting Position. Do not slump. Keep your body straight and lean a bit to show your interest. Do not recline or lean back as it is a sign of boredom. Do not cross your arms across your chest because it shows lack of confidence. Do not cross your legs so you won’t need to re cross them. Too much leg movement may come across as fidgeting. e Use hand gestures. Hand gestures are fine if you are more comfortable speaking using them but do not use them too much to the point of you getting distracted. e Eye Contact. Maintain eye contact but not constant contact. Avoiding eye contact conveys you are untrustworthy same time constant eye contact projects you as aggressive. Just maintain a balance of keeping eye contact when listening or responding then break eye contact a bit. Body Language For Seduction Using body language to seduce is probably one of the hardest to master for most people. It is not easy seducing someone without appearing “slutty” or a “player,” Here are five body language tips you can employ to let someone know you are seriously interested: e It is all about appearance. When going out with someone, try to find out where he is taking you. Wearing the appropriate dress will make the date feel less awkward. If he won’t tell, just ask if you need to wear something formal or casual. Scent also plays an important role when you are going out. Choose a scent that will not be too overpowering. Use make up that will emphasize your best features. e Lock eyes then break the gaze. Whether you are on a date, just having a nightcap or simply talking, let your gazes lock. Stare deeply and let it turn into a “flirty” staring contest, then look away or look down, parting your lips slightly. This signifies that the emotions between you two are intensifying. e Subtle Touch. Touch his arms once or twice, brush your knees “accidentally” against his; touching communicates your desire and doing it subtly will bring you up a notch in their eyes. It shows that you want more but sends of the signal of proper decorum and tastefulness. e Lean in. Leaning in is one of the strongest body language cue you can make. Leaning in conveys a possibility of a kiss. It also conveys that the person is more than just a little interested; the person is more open and vulnerable. However, be careful about leaning in to avoid head butting the person. e The kiss. This is another hard move to execute when seducing. Should you kiss the cheek or the lips? Should you even kiss at all? These questions are tough to answer especially on a first date. Best course of action is to follow your instinct and commit to it. Body Language Techniques For Public Speaking Speaking in front of an audience does not need be a terrifying experience. You have the most effective tool in your arsenal to capture your audience and be effective. Here are five body language tips you may not know you have: e Own the stage. In theaters, actors move around the stage to project a certain amount of confidence. The way you walk, stand, gesture, and speak tells your audience you are confident in the spotlight and you know what you are saying. This lends your speech more credibility. Do not overdo it; just own a certain portion of the stage instead of hiding behind a podium. e Use facial expressions. This is an integral part of body language. Your expression helps emphasize the meaning of the words you are saying. Your face should express a certain amount of seriousness if you are talking about something serious; or not remain stoic when you are delivering a joke. The audience will usually depend on your facial expression to augment the meaning of your words. e Use NODS formula. NODS stands for Neutral, Open, Defined and Strong. Start in a neutral position; hands on your side. The position will keep you open to you audience, helping influence flow both ways. Use defined or “clean” hand gestures to make them strong. If you accompany your speech with this formula, capturing your audience will be a breeze. e Use your voice. Speak in a clear tone of voice. You can alter the pitch and tone of your voice depending on the words you are using. If you are talking about something horrifying, do not make your voice sound happy. Use your voice to make your audience sympathize with you. e Use Props. Body language is not limited to physical movements. One element of body language is appearance and that includes props. Props is an effective tool when speaking in a business meeting or seminar. Today’s technology includes many gadgets and props that can aid you to get your message across strong and eloquent. Effective Body language Techniques and Tips for Teachers / the Classroom The average attention of an individual according to a 2015 research is 8.25 seconds, probably less if they are children. If you want to be effective as a teacher, you need to be ingenious in finding ways to hold the attention of your students. Here are five powerful body language tips that you can use effectively: e Anchoring. Anchoring is an NLP technique based on the classical conditioning where a biologically powerful stimulus paired with a previously neutral stimulus evokes a specific response. If you repeat the pairing often enough, the brain begins to view it as one. In a classroom, you can use a hand gesture. Say, you are teaching kids and you want them to understand the word “cat”, you can use a clawing gesture to associate with the word cat or tapping a board with a ruler and to tell them you want them to listen. Repeated often enough and soon you will not need to say the words. e The Eyes have it. The eyes can convey so much meaning, disapproval, surprise, happiness. Your eye movements can express a wealth of meaning. If you want them to look at a particular object, just direct your gaze on that object and your students will follow. If you want to show them you are serious, stare them in the eye without blinking. e Using your voice. The tone of your voice can also convey a wealth of information. The volume, melody or pitch of your voice can convey moods and emotions and heighten interest. Example if you want to teach them the difference between “loud” and “soft”, you can change the volume and pitch of your voice. You can say “loud” in a booming big voice while “soft” in a low pitch tone. e Exaggerate. If you have seen a theater play, you will notice the actors exaggerates their actions and the volume of their voice. Even the way they speak is exaggerated. This is because they are performing not just for the audience at the front; they also need those sitting at a distance. e Positive non verbal cues . You want your students to be comfortable and at ease with you; reduce the anxiety they feel and keep them motivated. They will not feel these things if they see you frowning or distant. Nod, lean in, use open palms, smile; these are body language cues designed to give positive vibes to anyone. Effective Body Language ‘Techniques for Sales and Negotiations If you noticed, the title mentioned sales first before negotiations because there is no point in negotiating if you do not have anything to sell. Body language plays a huge role in business transactions and experienced sales negotiators observe body language more than the words. Here are five body language moves you can look for: Chapter 2: Cold Reading environment includes crystal balls and tarot cards. But, did you ever think that these things are all just part of the props? Did you ever wonder how psychic readers seem to know so much about you? The truth is they really don’t know anything except what you tell them. This technique is called cold reading. What is cold reading Cold reading are set of strategies or techniques employed by psychics, fortunetellers, spiritual mediums and mentalist to manipulate their targets into believing that they know more than about the target and passing this on as a psychic ability. Manipulators and psychologists accomplish this by using various tricks that includes psychological manipulations to convince the target to reveal information about themselves unknowingly. Cold Reading Techniques Here are few common techniques that manipulators use when doing cold reading. Recapping the Target’s Information The reader should memorize all information that the target is giving him because this information will help him later. It is common for most people to forget what they said before and the reader can take advantage of this. During reading, the reader can repeat the information gathered from the target earlier and make it sound like information received psychically. The Shotgun Technique When you fire with a shotgun multiple bullets to a target, it is with the hope that at least one will hit the target. This is how the shotgun technique works. A reader throws out general information to an audience and observes their reaction. The reader will be able to narrow down on a subject based on their reaction or body language to his statement. Example, the reader can throw a general statement about a recent heartbreak or loss. There would at least be one whose mood will change or show reaction. The Blame Game Technique There are times when a reader is wrong in their reading. A cold reader should never accept that he or she is wrong. Shift the blame on the target or twist your statement to make your statement sound right. Using Barnum Statements The Barnum Effect was named after showman Phineas Taylor Barnum. In psychology, the Barnum effect refers to the gullible nature of people when reading descriptions of themselves. To a cold reader, these are statements, which appear personal or refers to a specific topic but in truth, it applies to many people. A cold reader can throw out a statement asking the audience about someone having a loved one suffer from chest complications. This can translate to various medical conditions relating to the chest or respiratory system. Response Observation Technique Observation is a great way to see how a target responds when asked direct questions. Body language is one of the best give away when trying to read a target. The way their eyes, arms, body moves and the change in their mood and facial expression on a specific statement speaks volume. This technique is most effective when performing mentalism. How to use cold reading Cold reading takes learning and practice. The reader needs to ask the right questions and learn to observe the response and behavior of their target. To do cold reading, here four things that a reader needs to remember. Modesty Is The Key Do not set a high bar for yourself to make it easier for you to surpass your target’s expectations. Your goal is to surprise and amaze your target not to disappoint them. Do not brag that you can read minds but instead be modest. Tone it down by telling your target that you can sense things when a person is troubled. Ask if the target wish for your help. Let your target know that it is up to them to piece together or make sense of the information you are giving them. You are just the medium. This transfers the responsibility to them instead of on you. After asking the target if he wishes to be read, follow this up by telling the target that it is up to him or her to make sense of the meaning of the information you will convey. Set Up Your Stage It is man’s nature to believe only what the eyes can see. This is why most psychics use props when doing their reading. Crystal balls or tarot cards are the most common props associated with psychic reading. The props usually help distract the target and very helpful to a reader when he or she is stuck. Let your target do all the talking. The more your target talks, the more useful information you can get and use during the reading. Do not interrupt them once you strike a chord. Most targets come into reading with the need to unburden themselves with whatever is weighing on their mind. If they are willing to discuss something, let them speak. The information you will gain from them are invaluable; and would help establish your “psychic” skills. Choose The Right Target Choose a target in advance and observe your target. Observe their body language. Listen to any information they might share and will be useful to you during the reading. Pay attention on your target’s mannerism and clothing. Use this to assume things about the target that you can utilize during the reading. Do not choose something obvious like telling them that they love the color pink when she is wearing an all pink outfit. Choose something less obvious like the way she touches the ring on her finger while giving a sigh. During the reading, you can say you are sensing that something is bothering her, a love problem perhaps. Maintain Confidence When doing the reading, be confident about your statements. Do not hesitate or show you doubt your statements. You will be more believable if the target can sense that you are knowledgeable about your statement. Do not falter or stutter even if you have realized your reading is wrong. Twist your words to make it seem to be the truth. Do not use specific statements but rather focus more on general statements that applies to anyone. This will lessen the chances of you being wrong. You can only use specific statements if you have first hand information on the target. Chapter 3: How to use Dark Psychology in our daily lives As described in Chapter 1 dark psychology is the psychological science and art of mind control and manipulation. It is a psychological phenomenon by which, individuals employ tactics as persuasion, coercion, motivation and manipulation to make other people do what they want . Everyday people use coercion, persuasion, motivation and manipulation either blatantly or covertly with the intention of gaining power and control over their intended victims. The manipulators use frame controls to make their targets play by their rules. What are frame controls? Frame controls are the attitudes and skills you employ to control interpersonal relationships and social interactions. It is a set of values, perspectives, and beliefs with which people base their interpretation of a specific topic, reality, and social interaction they engage in. When you have frame controls, people accept your morals, values, leadership, and presuppositions. The effectiveness of your frame controls depends on how well you use the power dynamics of social interaction. Power dynamics is the study of power negotiation between people and among groups of people and their skills in acquiring influence and social status, convert, and bend others to follow their will to reach certain goals. One area of study in power dynamics is persuasion, influence, and manipulation between individuals and within groups and one of its tools is dark psychology. Dark psychology uses the principles of persuasion, influence, and manipulation for the manipulators’ benefit but can limit and harm the freedom of their targets. There is a thin line dividing a normal individual and dark individual. Some people are more manipulative than others are while some carry stronger ethics and values. However, it is noteworthy to remember that manipulators biggest talent lies in the picking targets who are easy to manipulate. Darky Psychology applied in Daily Life Unknowingly, dark psychology happens in an individual’s daily interactions in different areas. e Dark psychology for social manipulation. This is manipulation in social settings are techniques to manipulate individual for their own benefit but harmful to their target. Techniques such as “pity play”, social scalping, feminist manipulation, and manipulative negotiations are just a few of the techniques employed by manipulators. e Dark psychology in dating. Manipulative techniques employed by the manipulator to meet his or her sexual needs to the disadvantage of the other party. The manipulator dates with total disregard to the welfare of the dating partner, at the same time exclusively seeking to make the most out of their self interest. e Dark psychology in seduction. Manipulative seduction is a continuous process from dating into a full blown relationship. During the dating stage, seduction happens to secure attachments and bonds based on mature affection on love but this is not always the case. Techniques vary from regression, judge seduction, traumatic bonding; emotional roller coaster bonding; love bombing and/or personal kinks. Dark psychology on relationships. Once relationship is formed, the manipulator tries to gain control of the partner and the relationship. Both men and women use tools to control their partner by deploying psychological and physical tools to control the partner. Dark psychology in politics. Dark psychology in politics has many layers but to make it simpler, you can group each layer into two main groups, campaign period and in office. Manipulators use propaganda techniques and political debates designed to frame opponent negatively, induce citizens to abandon individualism in favor of a collective group, and influence voters. Dark psychology in groups. Manipulative group leaders aims to reduce the power of members while they increase theirs. This in turn will make members dependent on them. Group leaders are not above framing any discordant voices as “uninformed”, “manipulative” (iron as it may seem), and “idiotic” so that they can inoculate their own “dogmas,” Dark psychology in war. Manipulators aim to unsettle or dominate enemies as a way to handicap their ability to fight back and make it resistance look futile. Throughout history, leaders won wars without any conflict by just instilling terror through “propaganda,” The use of psychological warfare instills fear and helplessness in victims and using the frame “holy war” made some of the world’s terrorist group more powerful and successful. Dark psychology in business. Business has a wide range of areas where manipulation can occur. Different frames for different areas. PR, advertising, sales, negotiations and even employee manipulation. Most prevalent is employee manipulation where the boss/company manipulates their employees into giving up their own self interest in favor of the company. These are just a few areas in life where dark psychology is applied. These areas will be discussed more in depth in the succeeding chapters. Chapter 4: Dark Psychology for Social anipulation i ’ ` Social psychology is the study of the science behind the how feelings, behavior and thoughts of individuals are influenced by implied, imagined, and actual presence of other individuals. In dark psychology, in a social setting are manipulative techniques, strategies and tactics employed for the benefit of the manipulator and cause harm to the target. Here are examples of manipulative techniques employed Manipulative Negotiation Techniques Manipulative negotiation techniques comes in various forms and if you do not know how to go around it is easy for you to become a victim. Sample Scenario Power negotiators will always choose their turf as location of their meeting because being in their turf gives them more power. Another tactic is making you chase after them by giving vague schedules or time of meeting. “Let’s meet in my office to discuss things.” “My schedule this week is tight. Let’s re schedule. Call me next week to confirm.” “I can only schedule you next Tuesday, is that ok?” Counter Buster Avoid going to their turf. Counter back with a proposed location where you are at ease and in control. You can also say it will be fair to meet midway. Do not chase too hard. If the power negotiator keeps you dangling, counter with a strategy of your own. “I can meet you Tuesday but I am thinking we can meet first before I meet another interested client I am meeting Monday.” Guilt trip Power Move Any kind of relationship needs balance. To make it work, there has to be give and take between both parties. Emotions and feelings play a huge part and without it, there can be no balance. When this happens, the weaker party resorts to using guilt tripping tactic. Sample Scenario: A wife trying to manipulate her husband to buy her a new car. “Honey, I badly need a new car. My current car is no longer reliable and might get me stranded.” “I know you received an increase from your promotion and can afford to get me the car.” “You are lucky your company gave you a company car but I have to settle for my old failing car.” The wife is setting up the husband to get her a new car by playing on his pity. She puts pressure on by telling him that he can afford to get her a new car and put her out her misery. This makes the husband feel guilty and a part of him wants to give in. Sometimes, targets find it hard to say “no” to the manipulator because they are family members or people they love. To bust this tactic: To bust this manipulative technique push back or resist with power. Acknowledge the guilt trip and call them on it. The husband can reply: “Honey, no guilt tripping.” “Yes the company gave me a car but I can only use it for business. The salary increase as you know is not that big.” “Don’t make me feel guilty. I know you are having issues with your car, but aren’t we saving for a down payment for a new house? We can bring the car to a good mechanic and have it fixed.” Direct confrontation makes the manipulator aware that you are onto his or her tricks and that it would not work. If your manipulator is a loved one, you tread carefully by pointing out that that you are uncomfortable with the manipulation but that you understand and you are willing to offer a compromise. Social Scalper In the laws of social exchange, the more people give, the more indebted you feel to them. These people are scalpers. In dark psychology, scalpers are subtle in their tactic to make you feel indebted to them. They do hordes of favors for you so that you will feel that you owe them. Usually they will say they did things for you and that they are available anytime for you and the most powerful word, “this was specially made for you,” On a small scale, this behavior looked positive but when it gets too much it turns exploitive. It can be annoying if you know you own someone something. Social scalpers plies you with more favors than you need because the more favors they give you, the more you feel indebted to them, easier for them to ask you something huge in return. When it happens, you feel the need to comply because you “owe” them. To bust a scalper: To counter a scalper, you need to play the same game back Sample Scenario: A Mother noticed her son has been doing all the household chores when he normally doesn’t. “Mom, I took the garbage out for you and wash the dishes in the sink. I did this so you can take some rest.” Now if the Mom were weak, she would feel grateful and say thank you for what her son did even if in truth he should be helping her with those chores. But a stronger Mom would make a smart reply: “That’s great son. Tomorrow I am cooking your favorite pasta so make sure you come home early.” The Mother telling her son that she will cook his favorite gave her back control and power because she gave something back to him without asking and would feel hesitant to ask something in return for doing all the chores. : Dark Psychology in Dating In a dating scenario the manipulator dates with total disregard on the well being of their target partner at the same time doing their best to maximize their own interest. The Male Dark Psychologist A male dark psychologist (or manipulator) can string a woman along without forming a relationship. He will lie about future goals and be vague about settling down. If he gives a commitment, he usually renege on it or he can pretend to be the ideal man to lower the target’s defenses and gets what he wants quicker. Here are two examples of dating games that men usually play and a ways to turn the tables on them. Showing Mixed Signals The trick involves the man showing interest at first then suddenly show either fake or real disinterest. Some men really lose interest when they see that it is not reciprocated. However, some might use this as a way to control you by making you hooked on them. Men who usually play this kind of game only has mild interest on you, already have several women in their life, too busy with their own stuff or a combination of all three. This technique is sending mixed signals to the woman. One minute he shows he had a good time and enjoyed her company, then the next he ignores her and is showing disinterest. This time he spent ignoring her leads the woman to wonder what happened or what had gone wrong until she is hooked on him and starts chasing him. How to Handle: Do not believe any promises until it happens. Words are meaningless if not accompanied by action. Just because he promised you another date, it does not mean it will happen until it actually happens. If he promised to call you the next day fine, if he doesn’t then move on and do not invest any more thoughts about him. If he does call after a long time you can beat him with his own game by telling him, “Geez, I am dating someone right now.” Wanting the Opposite Game The man pretends that he is unattainable and write you off by saying he wants someone opposite of you to make you chase him. People by nature want what they can’t have so this game works. If you have green eyes, he might say: I like women with blue eyes. If you are an actor, he might say: I only date lawyers If the female were weak, she would feel shattered but would be even more determined to have him just to prove him wrong. The chase will then start with the woman doing her best to prove she is the one. When this happens, she would be under the control of the man. How to Handle Give him back a dose of his own medicine only a bit more of a bitter medicine. If he says he likes women with blue eyes, you reply “Oh wow, blue eyes. They usually like green eyes because of the gene combination. Do you think they will prefer brown eyed men?” If he tells you he only dates lawyers, you say, “How are you supposed to meet lawyers? You don’t usually move within their circle.” The idea is to make them prove themselves to you instead of you proving your worth. Do not sound mean or bitter. Instead, make it sound as if you are genuinely worried that he will have a hard time finding those women. This will throw them off and make them think and end up proving their worth. The Female Dark Psychologist Women are no different from men when it comes to dating. They can either win or lose. They lose if the men gain their objective without receiving anything in return but they win if they get the men to do their bidding. They can do this by feigning low interest, fake rejection, and through sex just to get the men to invest on them. The first step is the “getting you hooked game,” These are games designed to get you into them. Once you are hooked, they start playing the “getting a commitment game,” These are games designed to get a commitment out of you. Then comes the “relationship power game”; designed to establish domination in the relationship. When the women do not get what they want they turn into “nasty games” that could turn the relationship toxic. Here are two samples of games women play and how to turn the tables on them. Withholding Sex The woman use sex as a bargaining chip. She would say, “I really don’t have sex on a first date but I can always make an exception.” It translates, “I will have sex with you if you give me what I want.” How to Handle If you give in to this game, you are practically telling her that you cannot get sex anywhere and sex is the only thing you want from her. Refuse. If sex is her biggest bargaining chip, look elsewhere. Hard as it may sound, but you do not need to step down to her level. Act offended and walk out (if you are in her place) or ask her to leave. Triangulation Game Yes, triad which means three. The idea is to give you a hint that if you do not make a commitment soon, she can find someone who does. She would tell you about other men who shows keen interest on her and expound on their good traits. She would not fail to tell you the good deeds these men are giving her. “Oh there’s this guy at work who keeps helping me with the new company program. Our boss paired us together to do a project and he is so patient...” How to Handle Do a reverse triangulation without looking as if you don’t really care. “Oh wow, really? Happy to hear you are getting help honey. The company also hired a new secretary to help in my work. This means we can spend more time together without worrying about work.” You just throw back that you too can have a third party in your relationship but at the same time showing her that you are more interested in your relationship with her by showing that the third party is there to help you both get closer. Chapter 6: Dark Psychology in Seduction In a relationship, both sexes find joy in pursuing their target, more so with men. The more difficult the challenge of the pursuit, the more worthwhile the rewards. Some prefer to be seduced and manipulated. However, not all seduction pursuits are positive. If the person has the “triad” personality traits, seduction can turn into a traumatic bond. Dark psychology in seduction creates bonds with the intention of inflicting psychological wounds. Here are six examples of dark psychology in seduction techniques. Regression seduction Sigmund Freud defined regression as a defense mechanism that leads to long term or temporary reversion of one’s self image to an earlier phase of development rather than face handling unwanted impulses. In psychology, regression occurs when an individual’s behavior and personality reverts to the early stages of development and behaves in a childish manner. Regression seduction is similar to DDLG or “Daddy Dom / Little Girl” roleplay in BDSM. In DDLG, one plays the role of the Daddy (Mom if female) and the other plays Little Girl (or Boy if male). The Dom is the superior in the relationship while the Little Girl is the submissive. The “little” undergoes age regression and the age depends on the time the “little” felt happy and content. Most of DDLG relationships are consensual role play to spice up the relationship. The strategy requires you to remind them of their childhood by playing the role of their parents and making them live through their oedipal dream. Example, scolding them like a parent would. Combine the scolding with an erotic component designed to seduce them into giving in to you. Judge Seduction In judge seduction, the seducer sets himself or herself up as superior, making the seduced chase for approval. The seducer can use subtle triangulation technique to create anxiety and discontent. If the seduced knows there is ongoing competition, they will try to seek ways to prove themselves to the seducer. Example, your man asked you to accompany him in their company party. He tells you “This is a formal event and the females will be wearing long gowns. I’m sure you can find something appropriate to make me proud.” If he has control over you, your normal reaction is to be defensive and try to prove to him that you are worthy to stand beside him. Traumatic Bonding Trauma bonding is comparable to Stockholm syndrome where a person is loyal to a destructive person. In trauma bonding, the superior partner uses emotional and/or physical abuse to control and keep the other partner loyal to him or her. Trauma bonding is not limited to domestic abuse, it can also happen in hostage taking, kidnapping, cult organizations, incest or child abuse and at work. Example, a stepfather having sexual relations with his stepdaughter will tell her that it is something normal, she owes him because he provides all their needs, he will buy everything she wants or use threat to force her. Another example would be a husband verbally and physically abusing his wife to punish her for her “supposed” errors or undermining her self confidence to the point that she is dependent on him. Attachment forms through the cycle of affectionate and destructive behavior by the abuser. Emotional Roller Coaster Bonding Emotional roller coaster bonding is somewhat similar to traumatic bonding except that manipulator uses emotional abuse to control. The manipulator uses a “love you hate you” kind of abuse. One moment the manipulator is very loving and sweet and the next he is demeaning and insulting. The manipulator employs yelling, triangulations, isolation, undermining self confidence, or a combination of other emotional tactics. Once down, the manipulator pacifies the target by showering her with affection and love. This makes the target feel grateful to the manipulator. The cycle continues until the target becomes attached to the manipulator, and stays waiting and hoping for the payoff, the showering of love and affection. Control Through Personal Kinks The manipulator provides the target sexual satisfaction through kinks. The target usually keeps their sexual kinks a secret and only the manipulator is aware of it. This gives the manipulator an advantage and making him or her the only person who can sexually satisfy them. This seduction technique is common in BDSM. After the movie “Fifty Shades of Gray” BDSM acceptance has increased although many who are into BDSM would disagree that the movie captured the real essence of the lifestyle. Despite the increase in acceptance, many still hide that they are into this lifestyle. Example, a Teacher who gets sexual satisfaction through spanking would not want that secret revealed. He or she would be dependent on her lover to provide the sexual kink because giving the lover full control over her. Love Bombing In a relationship, it is common for a partner (often the man) to try impressing the other partner. Dinner dates, flowers, gifts, sweet words, and other surprises are normal stuff that a man use to woo, seduce, and impress. However, when a man starts bombarding you with excessive affection, gifts, attention, flattery, praises it turns into a seductive tactic called love bombing. The key word here is “excessive,” When the person is going over the top with his affections, splurges on out of town dates, expensive jewelries and vacations, even if you just met, you should become alert. There are two types of love bombers; one is the desperate and needy love bomber who forms an unhealthy attachment to their target but tend to have genuine feelings. The other type is the sinister love bomber or the narcissist sociopath who deliberately employs strategies designed to control their target. Chapter 7: Dark Psychology In Relationships E A g d ‘ = Ms f g k UN i'e ti & After dating and all the conflicts it entails, you are now in the relationship stage. There is less conflict in relationship than in dating but now comes the biggest problem; keeping your partner hooked into you. Psychological Tools of Female Control As discussed earlier, women use three types of games to get their man. First is getting them hook game, second is getting a commitment game and lastly the relationship power game. The last being the hardest to accomplish. How do you keep them hooked into you? So how do women control men in a relationship? The top three frames that women set up to control the relationship. 1. Set up a “you are expected to provide for me” frame whereby men are expected to provide and cater to the women’s needs 2. Set up “judge frames” where men’s worthiness and value are assessed base on their ability to provide and cater to the women’s needs. 3. Set up relationship prize frame where women position themselves as the more valuable part of the relationship. In most relationships, women are the one in control. They set up the frames of reference in the relationship; what is proper and not, what is good and wrong, and what standards of behavior to be followed. Men rarely challenge these frames and end up playing by the women’s rules. To enforce the rules, women uses compliance tools on men to become the relationship lead allowing her to task him. What are these tools? Nagging and Drama Nagging works with rewards and punishments. If you are good, you are rewarded if not then you suffer the nagging wrath. Nagging is a long term behavioral changing tool and sets the priority of what is important while drama sets the priority of what is urgent. Drama becomes powerful with the use of emotions. Women use passion and emotions with the right amount of self righteousness that tells men “I am right,” Nagging combined with drama are tools of punishment and compliance of the judge power frame. Blaming and Criticism Women love using these verbal aggression tool because it puts the men on a defensive and when they do, it communicates to the women that they are guilty, confirms that he exist to serve and make her happy, and that she is totally in charge. Men are just caught dumbfounded by the outburst and the lashing and often reacts predictably. Their response from getting defensive, trying to fix the problem, make excuses, fight with them, ask the women to calm down and tries to understand the real problem. Shaming Shaming is probably the most powerful aggression and compliance tool used by women. Shame leverages the need for basic respect and worthy of love. Shame punishments includes isolation, scorn, and igniting the feelings of unworthiness. When women shames men, it attacks their manhood. It cuts them deeply, questioning their masculinity. Some of the most powerful shaming words that cripples men are impotent, weak, “pussy”, and unsuccessful. Tasking Drama, shaming, nagging, and criticism are merely tools to get to the core of how women really control men; tasking. The more the men executes the tasks the more they are likely to invest and commit in a relationship. Tasking usually starts early on in the relationship. It can be as innocent as asking you to get her a cup of coffee or maybe ask you to carry her things. Other women hold off on the tasking until their power increases. As the relationship progresses, the demands dramatically increases. It is the nature of men to chase and women assess. The hunter prey dynamics between men and women warps the mindset of men. They feel as if they hit the jackpot once the chase is over. Thus, when men finally get into the relationship, their mindset attuned to accepting the women’s demands. Males techniques for mate control Abusive men think that they have the right to control their partners. They have to right over how they think, what they should think, what they should say, and how they should act and behave. Their words is law and believe they are the only one entitled to allow and remove their partners’ freedom. This all boils down to what mindset of “Alpha Beta” roles society imposed. The Alpha male is confident, dominant, daring, doesn’t give a damn about anything. As a result, they command respect, leads, and they are independent and the Alpha male holds his frame. The Beta male is unassuming, shy, defers to others, cares deeply about others’ opinion of him, socially awkward, shy, weak, small, and unlike the alpha does not hold his frame. Most males are beta males because it is a biological tendency. Control is exercised using both psychological and physical tools like criticism, saying that their controlling behavior is for your best interest, pretending hurt by your behavior and non stop complaining. Possessiveness They employ different tactics to keep you to himself like isolation and guilt tripping. Keeping their partner isolated makes it easier for manipulators to control their partners. They usually excuse this behavior as “doing it for your good,” Entitlement Manipulators feel they are entitled to everything in the relationship. They give them freedom and only they are entitled to take it back. Manipulators feel they are entitled to have their partner even if they do not want them. They are entitled to have their partner serve and take care of them. Subtle Manipulations Control is not limited to verbal or physical intimidation. Manipulators employ mental games and power moves to control their partner. Some of these manipulative tactics include: e Blaming his sins on you. e Divide and conquer tactic, albeit turning you against family and friends. e Gaslighting to drive you insane and make you doubt your self e Keeping you out of sort with his mood swings. Power dynamics exist in any kind of relationship and it helps support a healthy relationships. Chapter 8: Dark Psychology In Politics You can be grouping politics into two phases, “campaign” phase and “in office” phase. It is difficult to separate the two because even while in office, politicians continue to campaign for the next election. However, politicians set up different frames that separates the two. During campaigns Politicians use many influencing techniques to get people’s vote and get them to back their policies despite it not being in their best interest. During campaign, politicians set the following frames: e Their opponent is unworthy and ineffective e The current state of how things are is hopeless e He is the only solution to the problem e In extreme scenarios, create an enemy and paint himself as the only person who can destroy said enemy Some of the political persuasion tactics employed: 1. Embody the nation and its values. There is no greater political tactic than convincing your voters that you represent the country and all its values. This makes them a mythic selfless personification of the nation. The power invoked using this tactic grows unmatched. The vote against him is a vote against the country and its values. 2. Create Enemies. Machiavellian politicians create enemies, not make them. When an enemy shows up, the group (the nation) tends to coalesce and forget their differences. After 9 11, the Bush capitalized on the threat of Al Qaeda and the word “terror” became the most persuasive word in the dictionary. 3. There is no I, only us. Just like in corporate manipulation, voters are encouraged to give up their self interest in favor of the “national collective community,” Politicians encourage the “We” mindset so depersonalization can start. If this continues, the “collective community” now becomes more important than the individual does. 4. Feign disinterest in power. Politicians will never show that they are in it for the power. They talk about their commitments to the people and that they are doing the mandate of the people while hiding their ambition to gain power. Once in power The politician effectively use his manipulative tactics to gain the vote of the electorate, he now goes in office. This time he sets a different frame. The frames he sets up now focuses more on the country versus the outside forces and the country owes him. The politician frames: He is the reason why things are going well The status quo is highly positive Bad things are caused by external forces Adopt ideals of “country first before self” Some of the tactics employed by manipulative politicians: 1. Instill fear and frames himself as the only savior. Take the case of Joseph Stalin. He employed propaganda to instill fear amongst the people. Art, music, and poetry were all about glorifying him. Statues and monuments of himself were erected in honor him. He set himself as a God like figure and prominent in people’s daily life making it easy to indoctrinate everyone. . Use scapegoats when things go wrong. The Covid pandemic put China in the spotlight. Some political leaders blame China for the pandemic and uses them as reason why the virus spread. However, the virus spread also because of political leaders’ inability to take immediate measures to protect their citizens. . “Great Leader” Dupe. The ultimate prize for any leader is having everyone believe that only he can do the job. When Bush created the “external enemy”, he painted himself as the only person who can lead the country to victory. Like a true commander in chief, when he visited the USS Abraham Lincoln, he flew, talked, and dress the part; earning him the highest approval ratings of any US President ever. There is nothing wrong with politics per se. Despite the fact that politics attract power hungry individuals at the end of the day, these power hungry individuals are just like everyone else; encouraged by good ideals just as much as by their darker sides. Chapter 9: Dark Psychology In Groups j À i wt i AE. ¥ Essentially, groups are divided into primary and secondary. The primary groups are those that influenced an individual’s childhood and adolescence. The primary groups mold the individual’s basic value and forging their identity. The two primary groups are family and friends. Secondary groups are larger, impersonal, less durable and unstable than primary groups. These are groups formed for the purpose of achieving common goals, solving a problem, and sharing interests. Some secondary groups include: e Political Parties e Religious Groups e Study Groups e Working Groups e Sports Clubs e Groups defending minorities. Most group leaders aim to decrease the independence and powers of their members while they gain more power and influence. Leaders employ manipulative tactics to make members more dependent on the group and eventually on them. Manipulative Group Tactics Here are a few tactics usually employed by leaders to control members. Make people’s problems appear bigger than they actually are This is a common tactic employed to make members dependent on the group and its leader. The leader will make use of exaggeration to make a simple problem appear bigger to make the member believe he is the only one who can help solve that problem. A simple example: Anne moved to a new neighborhood. The first thing she noticed is the lack of streetlight in her street while the other street blocks were well lit. She asked her neighbor whom she could talk to about requesting a light post. The neighbor informed her that there is a monthly neighborhood association meeting coming up and she can put out the request there. During the meeting, she made the request. The President, upon hearing the request made a show of making a simple street light problem into a start of a neighborhood crime watch. The President of the association started talking about what crimes can be perpetuated with the lack of streetlight and before Anne realized it, the meeting turned into planning a neighborhood crime watch, a request to City Hall for local police to do more patrol. By the end of the meeting, the simple streetlight problem turned into something bigger. In this scenario, the association President made a simple problem bigger by creating an unknown and unseen enemy. This made the association President a hero in the eyes of the neighborhood for showing them the bigger picture. From a household problem, it became a community problem. From a simple streetlight problem, it became a fight against neighborhood crime. Ridicule, disempower, or exclude discording voices The manipulative leaders want to remove all discordant opinions by framing it as “manipulative”, “uninformed”, “idiotic”, and other types of socio cultural manipulation and as a result, allow them to indoctrinate members with their own dogmas and dictates. A good example is the feminist and patriarch movement. Men promote a culture of honors that seek to introduce a culture that limits women’s sexual freedom to fight against non paternity events. Feminist movements that promotes “me too” culture that allows them to shame and destroy men and empowers them against any type of advances. Make up a big, huge enemy that can only be fought as a group Leaders create an enemy to get the group cohesive. It is instinctive for people to seek refuge from a group when they perceive a huge external enemy. Take the case of Bin Laden’s Al Qaeda group. Al Qaeda started as a jihad group who fought the invasion of the Soviets in Afghanistan. Encouraged by what they perceived as success, Osama Bin Laden created a bigger enemy by declaring war to the US. The once unknown group became a household name after the 9 11 attacks. The attacked established Al Qaeda as a force to be reckoned with. Al Qaeda used the attack to gain more followers. Fostering group’s superiority over the individual The group comes first and there is no such thing as individualism. The leaders project the group as an elite group. The leader is not above using manipulative aggressions to impose his dominance to the collective member. One good example of that is the “close door policy” of China during the Qing Dynasty. The policy projects a frame of protecting national interest. The rulers of Qing Dynasty wanted to protect the control they have over the nation as well as all its resources. Dissolving members’ ego with the group When personal ego is not satisfied with itself, it seeks to strengthen itself by identifying with a group — political party, nation, institution, sect, corporation, gang, club and other secondary social groups. Their egos dissolve as they dedicate themselves selflessly and without personal gain no matter how hard they work. They take pride and fulfillment in the success of the group. Best example of this are “suicide bombers” who are willing to sacrifice their lives for the good of the group. Remember the Times Square Bombing in 2017 where the bomber strapped a pipe bomb around his body and detonated it. There is also the “suicide bomber” of 9 11 who took thousands of lives for what they believe is for the good of their group Al Qaeda. Surprisingly, many of these so called “suicide bombers” are intellectuals but they gave up their ego for the benefit of the collective members. Fusing the group with the leader The leader embodies the group allowing him total control over its members. The group is now the leader and the leader is the group. Take the case of Charles Manson as an example. Manson projected himself to his followers as the all powerful Messiah, thus convincing them to believer that they are members of an elite group and the only solution to the world’s problems. Manson became the center of his follower’s lives, the whole reason for their existence and survival. Acting against him is acting against themselves. They follow him blindly even to the extent of committing heinous crimes. : Dark Psychology In War H9 a ` TA a >. | Perhaps there is no greater example of dark psychology in war than the legendary Trojan horse that cause the fall of Troy. In Greek mythology, Odysseus used a ruse to fool the people of Troy using the most sacred animal to the Trojans, a horse. They built a hollow Trojan horse made from a cornel tree grove saying the Greeks are leaving it as a dedication to Athena. What the people of Troy did not know was the hollow horse was filled with soldiers led by Odysseus while the rest of the Greek army made a show of burning their camp and sailing away but the truth was they were just stationed nearby. The Trojans fell for the ruse and started to celebrate. They even pulled the wooden horse inside the city. At the height of their merriment and drunkenness, the army hidden inside the horse came out while the fleet stationed nearby received a signal to return. Troy fell that night into the hands of the Greek with the use what can be termed as a psychological warfare. Dark psychology in war seeks to mentally unsettle, dominate, and instill terror in the enemy to handicap their fighting ability making resistance futile. Manipulative communication through propaganda frames the enemy as ruthless, brutal, and barbaric. Terror to Win Without Conflict Make the enemy surrender without a fight. So easy to say but is it possible? Unbelievably, it happened throughout history. Seeds of terror planted by the enemy by using “propaganda.” What is propaganda? Propaganda is a means of communication primarily used to further an agenda and influence an audience. It is not necessarily objective in view and may represent facts selectively to encourage a particular perception. Propaganda per se is not bad but during the start of the 20" century, propaganda received negative connotation because of its association in the use of manipulative approach. You can disseminate propaganda in many ways, widespread exaggerated rumor, posters, pamphlets, paintings, films, television, radio, and most recently via social media. Propaganda is a very powerful tool as seen throughout history. Genghis Khan sowed terror throughout Asia and Europe with widespread rumors of his ruthlessness and brutality as a conqueror. Although history states some of his victories were exaggerated. He encouraged the exaggeration to make it known to everyone that he is not to be trifled with. Another man who sowed terror through widespread propaganda is Joseph Stalin when he reigned dictator of Russia. Through propaganda, he created a God like personality for himself. Statues, photographs, and posters of himself were erected and placed extensively all throughout the city. Cities and streets were renamed under his name. Every art form were utilized to glorify him. He became ubiquitous in Russians’ daily life making it easy to indoctrinate them. He convinced people that he has their interest and care with his propaganda of the 5 Year plan that would propel Russia from an agricultural country to an industrial world power. Everyone who opposed him were executed and labeled traitors. This made his doctrines and policies unchallenged. His reign of terror cost Russia more than half a million of innocent deaths. Today, it continues with Al Qaeda and ISIS extremist groups. They use propaganda to indoctrinate and recruit people. Al Qaeda established their supremacy as an extremist to be taken seriously with their 9/11 attack in the United States. ISIS use a more modern approach; social media. Numerous propaganda materials are posted on Facebook making it easy for them to convey their ideologies and recruit more. The You Tube videos of ISIS beheading hostages established their brutality and ruthlessness even if some of the videos are questionable. The Nazi Stuka: Noise as Psychological Warfare The Nazi Stuka is the German dive bomber and ground attack aircraft JU 87 employed by the Germans during World War II. The aircraft is distinct with its inverted wings and its fixed spatted undercarriage. People recognizes the aircraft once they see it up in the air, but what makes it standout are the mounted sirens called Jericho Trumpet. The wailing siren became the propaganda symbol of the German victories from 1939 to 1944. The wailing siren became synonymous with “imminent danger” because the Stuka has a reputation to hit its target with accurate precision and was the cause of the fall of Poland and France during WWII. The psychological impact of the siren is enough to paralyze people into fear. Today, the Stuka’s wailing siren is used by Hollywood filmmakers as sound effects for their movies to signal impending doom. Dark Psychology on the Air Dark psychology is most effectively set up to control and influence public opinion during wartime. There are five elements needed to employ wartime manipulation: 1. The manipulator frames himself as “good” or “holy” 2. The manipulator frames the enemy as “oppressive”, “evil”, “brutal”, or better yet, “a threat” to everyone’s lives. 3. Victory is imminent because the good guys always win. 4. Everyone has a lot to gain in this war. 5. Use propaganda to hide the cost of the war like death and suffering of the innocents caught in the crossfire. The Al Qaeda became a global force from its humble beginning as an Anti Soviet jihad in Afghanistan during the 1980s under the leadership of Osama Bin Laden. Bin Laden’s vision is to create an elite force who will help in the struggle of Moslems against their own oppressors. In the 1990s, his focused changed from the local oppressors to the United States who he perceives as the bigger enemy controlling the local oppressors. Bin Laden’s greatest achievement was the 9/11 attack on the US turning Al Qaeda brand as a household name. This propelled Al Qaeda as a super force and those who adopted the Al Qaeda brand were given access to all its assets, weapons, money, expertise, logistics support, and Ivy League training on jihadist education. The biggest difference between Al Qaeda and Islamic State is that they do not kill Sunni’s for fear of alienating them but this is not to say that Al Qaeda is innocent from the deaths of many Moslems. They were just better at hiding it. Chapter 11: Dark Psychology In Business There are different levels of manipulation when it comes to business. e PR Manipulation. The company frames itself that they exist to help humanity and not to make money for its owners. e Marketing Manipulation. The company frames the brand as the best brand in the market through expert opinions, scarcity, promotion, or subliminal marketing. e Negotiation Manipulation. Employing body language techniques to get the sale. e Employee Manipulation. Using techniques to make the employees give up their self interest in favor of the company’s interest. This chapter will focus on the last level, employee manipulation. The techniques leaders use to control their employees for the benefit of the company. Corporate Manipulation of Employees There are weak leaders and there are smart leaders. The weak ones often resort to deceit and manipulation as a weapon to get what they want. They are masters at using emotional tirades to get away with things. Some are subtle in their approach but be warned that manipulation can easily reach psychopathic level. Here are some signs that your boss is manipulating you and ways to deal with it with aplomb. Master and Servant This is one of the most common technique employed by a boss to the employee. “I am the boss, so you follow my orders.” The boss often gives tasks to the employee beyond his or her scope of responsibility. The boss couch the demands with the pretext of the demand being for the good of the company and everyone in the company. How to handle The first thing every employee should learn is his or her duties and responsibilities as an employee of the company. When the boss tasks you to do something outside of the scope of your responsibilities, you have every right to say “No,” Tum it down politely but make sure that your performance on your official task is above reproach. On another hand, doing your boss small favors occasionally will not hurt you. Veiled Threat and Guilt Tripping Manipulative bosses takes advantage of employees who lack self confidence. The boss usually uses guilt tripping to manipulate the employee. “The company has done so much for you. What is a little favor compared to that.” They lay down the guilt thick. Sometimes, they use veiled threats, “The annual performance review is happening, and we are on the lookout for people who serves the interest of the company best.” How to handle When faced with a situation like this just do your job. Deal with your boss in a professional and self assured manner. Fight fair and do not play dirty just because he chooses to do so. Do all this from day one to make it difficult for your boss to force inappropriate habits. Just keep in mind that he is still your boss and due your courtesy. The Dodger One of the worst manipulators you can encounter. The dodger avoids conflicts and issues and would do anything to escape problems. They often change topics when you raise an issue to distract you. “Can we discuss this later? I have an urgent meeting that I need to attend to.” He would find any excuse to avoid addressing the issue and make you run around after him. How to handle If you have a dodger for a boss, ask him to give you a specific day and time within the week to discuss work related issues. Make the request formal such as an email. This also serves as your evidence should he renege on it. Always send him minutes of your discussion with him for reference purposes. If needed, follow up feedback and replies with an email, fax, or text. This helps protects you from potential conflicts in the future. The Blamer This type of manipulator plays underhanded tactics to manipulate. He or she would often use the employee as the scapegoat and shift the blame entirely on the employee. He portrays you as inadequate, uses subtle sarcasm when talking to you, puts you down, and other tactics to humiliate you. Example, “You know that there is a more economical way of doing things, right?” Another example, “Is this your first time to do work on this kind of project? What are you, a clerk?” How to handle Talk to your boss. Set your boundaries. Inform him that you would like to work in an atmosphere of mutual respect. Example, ask him to call you in his office privately to discuss an issue or complaint against you. Ask him to speak to you in a professional manner and avoid sarcasm and shaming. Do not let your boss’s actions affect you. Focus on the current issue and try not to get emotional. Manipulative people love stirring up your emotions. Show bravado and confidence. Once a manipulator realizes that their tactic is not getting to you, they will stop. Playing Indifferent Some manipulative boss only pays attention to what would suit him. He plays and acts oblivious and dumb to issues that can affect your performance. There are some boss who feels threatened by their subordinates and would create situations that can stall your progress. Example, if you have a recommended solution to a certain issue, he would ignore your recommendations and would often scoffed it off. They tend to bypass you when it comes to big projects and treat you as if you do not exist. How to handle There are two possible reasons why your boss behaves this way; he hates you or he wants you to suck up to him. Either reason, the best way to handle this is to speak to someone who is more senior than your boss is or you can speak with HR to discuss his treatment of you. Just be factual and do not talk trash about him. State that you feel this kind of behavior will jeopardize your performance. At the same time, make sure your performance is not sub par. In the event conflict arises, higher authorities will be aware of it and not put you in a bad light. Chapter 12: Gaslighting The term Gaslighting originated from Patrick Hamilton’s 1938 stage play entitled Gas Light. The story is about a husband trying to convince his wife that she is going insane by manipulating sounds and objects in the house and when she tries to validate them, he tells her she is being delusional. The word gas lighting refers to how the husband tries to dim the gas light in the house while pretending that it is not happening to make his wife doubt herself and her perception of the truth. What is Gaslighting? Gaslighting is a manipulative technique or a psychological form of abuse where an individual or group makes another person question his or her memories, sanity, and perception of the truth. Person experiencing anxiety, confusion, and self doubt are easy preys of gaslighting. Warning and signs of Gaslighting Gaslighters are usually narcissists. They always demand attention and everything should always be about them. If they cannot sway you, they will start to torment you. If you try to leave them, they will manipulate you to pull you back. Beware if you see some the following signs: e They project their flaws on you. e They tell you people think you are crazy or tell you that you are crazy. e They isolate you by saying your friends and family are bad influences. e They often lie even without reason. When confronted with their lies, they deny it or counter that you are being paranoid or imagining things. The intent of the gaslighter is to make you dependent on them for your version of reality. Example of Gaslighting in action Gaslighters plant seeds of doubts in the victim’s mind to disorient and confuse them so they can gain control over them. Although gaslighting happens more commonly in romantic relationships, it can also happen within a family and in your own workplace. To understand more, here are illustrations of gaslighting in action. Gaslighting in relationships Gaslighting is very common between couples who are in a romantic relationship. The manipulator would make promises that he has no plans of keeping. When you follow up on it, he would deny saying it or would probably say you understood wrong. Another example is he would tell you information that he would later on deny making you think if he really said it or not. Example, you would say, “I cooked shrimp pasta for you.” He would reply, “You know I am allergic to shrimp.” Now you would think, when did he ever told you that? Sometimes he would follow it up with triangulation technique, “My ex always remembers which food I’m allergic to.” So now on top of the doubt, you would feel guilty because it would seem that you are not giving importance to his needs. Gaslighting within family Your family is your best support system but unbelievably, gaslighting happens amongst family members. Children will naturally test boundaries set by their parents. Example, A child received a B minus in his report card, the parent will say, “This is your fault, if you had been studying this wouldnt have happened. I told you to study. You know I cannot watch over you because I am busy with work. You never listen to me.” The parent is passing on the blame of his or her shortcomings to the child. It will not help them if a parent blame them for “mucking up” or “misbehaving” instead of talking to them and teaching them the consequences of their action. Reinforcing their belief that they are not good enough will only instill fear to explore and later on stunt their growth and development. Gaslighting at workplace Gaslighting often succeeds when you lack self confidence. It is designed to confuse you so they can maintain power over you. You can also find gaslighting at your workplace. It can come from a colleague or your own boss. Almost every boss wants to maximize their staff and to do that they can use gaslighting to make you comply. Example, Your boss tells you that working overtime can lead to a promotion, so you do it but only to find that another person was promoted. You confront your boss about it and his reply, “I did not say if you work overtime you will surely get promoted. I said working overtime could lead to a promotion. Your other colleague worked overtime too; and was submitting her work before deadline.” Another example, A jealous colleague can give you a hard time by trying to undermine you self confidence. “Oh didn’t you receive the company memo? I’m sorry, I guess only few select people received a copy.” Gaslighiting Techniques Here are five most common gaslighting technique employed by manipulators: 1. Denial. This is the number one technique used in gaslighting. The manipulator will deny saying anything or pretend that events did not happen. Example. “You are being paranoid, you know that’s not true.” or “Don’t make up things.” Chapter 13: How to get what you want with NLP (Neuro Linguistic Programming) NLP, or more formally called Neuro Linguistic Programming is a pseudoscientific methodology to psychotherapy, communication and personal development created in 1970s by author trainer Richard Bandler and author linguist John Grinder. The two claimed that the neurological processes, language, and behavioral patterns gained from experience are all connected, hence the name “neuro linguistic programming,” They also claimed that the approach can “model” skills of exceptional individuals allowing everyone to gain the same skills. Further, a single session of NLP can help treat phobias, depression, allergy, psychosomatic illnesses, common cold, learning disorders and tic disorders. However, no scientific evidence exist at this time that can support the claims of NLP supporters. Reviews showed NLP has outdated comparison of how the brain works against current neurological theories. It also found flaws in its research methodology. Principle of NLP In their book How to Take Charge of Your Life: The Users’ Guide to NLP , Richard Bandler and colleagues stated, “You cannot always control what happens in life but you can always control how you deal with it.” NLP teaches, enables and empowers you to understand better the way your brain processes language and words you use and how they affect your past, your present and your future. In a nutshell, change is possible, you just need the willingness to learn and the desire to accept new ways to be with your thoughts, yourself and with others. How to use Neuro Linguistic Programming to get what you want Despite NLP being widely discredited and psychologists no longer recommends it, it remains popular to some loyal practitioners particularly in the business industry and self help world. Here are some techniques that NLP practitioners use to control other people’s minds: 1. Focused attention on subject. A professional NLP specialist focused their attention in watching your body cues like body flush, nervous tics, pupil dilation, eye movement, breathing patterns and other body language cues. The specialist can take note of these cues and determine how the subject process and perceives information. 2. Use voice roll technique. A voice roll is a patterned pace style that buries deep what you want to impart. You can do this by placing emphasis on the desired word using monotonous patterned style. This technique bypasses the conscious mind and goes directly to the subconscious. Professionals deliver the words using the pattern of the person’s hear beat; about 45 to 72 beats per minute. 3. Using Word Patterns. Skilled NLP professionals employs a specific word pattern that looks ordinary or normal but actually permissive and suggestive. Examples of these words include see that, hear this, eventually, feel free, as, now, because, means, and many others . These words are usually connected with the senses and can invoke a frame of mind like experiencing, imagining, and feeling. 4. Covert building of rapport. Skilled NLP practitioners use brutal language to strengthen suggestibility. The rapport is built by closely watching you, and subtly interpreting your body language; leaving you vulnerable. 5. Subliminal Programming. Using subliminal programming to create an anchor that would make you easy prey even to a simple combination of techniques, by saying one thing and implanting another thing in the subconscious of the victim. NLP in Practice You can practice NLP on yourself or to others as a certified practitioner. Here some tips on how to practice NLP on yourself: 1. Set your goals. Never make negative goals. Your goal should be something that you really want. Think of things you want to gain, achieve and develop instead of the things you want to avoid or lose. Be specific when making your goal. Own your goal instead of merely wishing for it. Example, if you want a partner in your life make your goal clear “Meet a special someone.” Instead, be specific and own it, “Live with my one true love.” Chapter 14: How to avoid being manipulated You do not have to be a victim of manipulation. Here are some tips on how you can avoid being manipulated: 1. Observe people. Observe people; watch how they act towards others and various situations. While it is true that everyone has a slight degree of social differentiation, a manipulator tends to be more habitual. They usually act on the extremes, rude to some and overly polite to others—or fiercely aggressive one moment and totally helpless the next. When you meet this kind of individual, the best course of action is to stay away from them. Keep your distance unless it is absolutely necessary. 2. Set boundaries. Setting boundaries for yourself is a basic defense against would be manipulators. Know what your basic rights are and use them to set your boundaries. Your rights includes: e Tosay No e Set your personal priorities e To express your own opinions, feelings, and desires e To be treated respectfully e To protect yourself e To have a healthy and happy life e To have a different opinion from others e To receive what you paid for. These rights will set your boundaries and not allow others to violate these boundaries. As long as you not inflicting harm to others you have the right to defend and stand up for yourself against anyone. 3. It is not your fault. When you feel your answers does not seem to satisfy the manipulator, never blame yourself. You have to remember that manipulators exploit your weaknesses and use them against you. There is nothing wrong with you, the manipulator aims to make you feel bad and inadequate to gain control and power over you. If this happens, remember your basic rights and ask yourself this questions: e Is this person treating me with respect? e Are his or her demands reasonable? e Is our relationship one way or two way? e Does this relationship make me feel good? From these questions, you will be able to determine if the problem is really you or the other person. 4. Counter back. Manipulators always demand from their victims and most often than not, the victims give in to these demands. When their demands becomes too unreasonable for you, counter back to see if they know they are demanding too much. You can throw back some questions to make them aware that their request is putting you at a disadvantage: e Are you telling me or asking me? e What do I get if I say yes? e Does that sound fair to you? e Do you really expect me to do that? When you ask questions like these, they become aware of the inequity of their demands and would most likely stop or back down. However, not everyone will be such as the narcissist who will ignore your questions and insist on getting their own way. When you meet this kind, use the next tip to stop the discussion and retain control. 5. Pl think about it. These words are probably the most powerful words you can utter to counter an unreasonable demand. Manipulators have a way of putting pressure on you to give an immediate answer. When this happens, buy yourself time and distance yourself from their influence. Give yourself power by saying “I will think about it.” These words now give you the power and the manipulator in a lesser degree of power. You now control the situation; waiting for your answer. This also gives you enough time to think and weigh the pros and cons of their demand and consider whether you should negotiate or altogether say “No,” 6. Say No . Saying “no” is not easy as it may sound. For some, saying the dreaded two letter word is uncomfortable while another may actually want to say yes but would like to think about it first; others just want to avoid conflict. Saying “no” is not a sign of rudeness if you say it articulately and diplomatically. You can say “no” without being rude or impolite. e If you are saying no, do not feel guilty. You do not owe the one making the request anything. e They are making the request because they need you and your influence. If you feel that saying yes can violate your set boundaries then do not give in. Remember that you have the right to say no without guilt, the right to set your personal priorities, and the right to live a happy and healthy life. e Protect your most important resource — time. If saying yes would take up time off your other priorities then be honest. You can say, “I would like to help you but I still have prior commitment.” e Take away the sting of your rejection by referring them to someone. This shows your support thus, would not think too badly of you when you say “no,” 7. Set Consequences . When a manipulator refuse to take the word “no” aS an answer, set consequences. Asserting consequence when effectively done can help you “stand down” against a manipulator. This would give him pause and could make him change his behavior. Example, “Jf you continue with this offensive behavior, I will leave (or ask you to leave).” 8. Stand up for your rights. In tip number two, you learned about your basic rights and using them to set boundaries. However, manipulators can employ bullying through intimidation and physical harm. What you need to remember is that bullies can only bully those they see as weak; if they see you are passive and compliant. Your best course of action is to stand up for your rights. Most bullies are cowards inside and when they see their victim fighting back, they would normally back down. As long as you are not harming other people, there is nothing wrong with standing up for your rights. Manipulation only happens if you allow it. Chapter 15: Dark Humor “Laughter is the best medicine.” Does this ancient proverb still works today? Humor is known to improve mood and reduce stress. After effects of laugh can slow heart rate and lower blood pressure. These are likely due to changes in the endocrine and reduced epinephrine and cortisol. A study by researchers from the University of Vienna indicates that those who appreciate dark or “gallow” humor have high level of intelligence. What is Dark Humor? Dark humor or dark comedy is a style of humor that makes light of taboo subject matters, specifically subjects regarded as painful and serious to discuss. Popular themes of this genre of humor includes violence, death, disease, discrimination, and human sexuality. Black humor covers humor that relates to a broad range of subjects but it differs from blue humor, which primarily focuses on topics like sex, bodily fluids, and nudity. Often, the term “gallows” humor is associated with black humor but the former tends to focus on humor about situations about death or about death itself. Surrealist theorist André Breton coined the term “black humor” in 1935, in accordance of his interpretation of Jonathan Swift’s writings. In his book, Breton credited Jonathan Swift as the creator of black humor that arises from skepticism and cynicism. In American literature, the first writers to include black humor in their works were Vladimir Nabokov and Nathaniel West but it was not until 1965 that the concept of using gallows or black humor garnered nationwide attention with the publication of the paperback anthology “Black Humor,” A study was published in the journal “Cognitive Processing” on 156 subjects presented with 12 cartoons that features gallows humor featuring dark subjects like death, handicap, deformity, disease, and war. The test measured the subjects’ attention in non verbal or verbal forms with moods and aggression levels. The result showed subjects who liked the cartoons are well educated, have high level of intelligence and displays low levels of aggression and mood swings. Those who did not appreciate the gallows humor in the cartoons have opposite traits. Examples of Dark Jokes 1. My old aunts always tease me every time a sibling or cousin gets married. “Well Debbie do you think you will be next?” I started asking the same question to them during family funerals. The teasing stopped. 2. Patient: Oh Doctor, I think I have Alzheimer’s. Doctor: What makes you think you have the disease? Patient: What disease? 3. A lawyer who has a doctor for a girlfriend was hoping to get her to cook for him. Lawyer: “Honey, they said that a way to a man’s heart is through his stomach.” Doctor: “Oh really? Personally, I find it easier if I go through his ribcage.” 4. Woman: I want a divorce! Man: We made a vow in church to remain together until death do us part. Woman: Yeah, you’re right. Oh well then, just drink up the coffee I made for you. 5. Son: “Mom! Mom! Dad hanged himself in the garage!” Mother: “What??!!” Son: “Gotcha! It’s April’s fool! He hangs in the attic.” 6. A little girl ran happily to her Dad. Little Girl: Daddy, daddy guess how old I will turn next month. Dad: Oh I don’t know, why don’t my smart little Princess tell me. The little girl held up four fingers and gave a huge smile. Four hours later, the police are now with them but she still refuse to say where she got the fingers. 7. A couple made an announcement in a family gathering, “My wife and I have decided not to have kids. If any of you does, please let us know and we would be happy to drop them off tonight.” 8. Aman to a sales clerk, “Do you have an anniversary card that says, “Happy Anniversary to my one and only” ?” The sales clerk says, “Yes. How many do you need?” 9. The grandmother of a friend died. I went to attend the funeral but only found my friend, no grandma so I asked, “Where is your grandmother?” My friend replied, “I took her to the fish spa.” I was aghast, “What! Why did you do that?” He replied, “The fish spa only charges 50 dollars to eat dead skin, the cemetery charges more for burying her.” 10. A woman in labor is moaning in pain. The tries to ease her pain with words. “I’m so sorry you have to endure this honey.” The woman replied, “Oh don’t worry, it is not your fault.” 11. A priest asked a criminal sentenced to die of electrocution, “What is your last request?” The criminal replied, “Can you hold my hand as I die?” 12. Girlfriend: I was once a Christian. Boyfriend: What! We are finished. I’m breaking off with you. Girlfriend: How can you be so judgmental? Boyfriend: I’m not but I can only love you as Christhie. 13. Customer: Can I have a box of condoms please. Sales Clerk: That will be $4. Would you like a bag with it? Customer: No need, she’s really gorgeous. 14. A Zookeeper heard three kids arguing near one a lion enclosure. He got concerned so he decided to approach them. He asked them to introduce themselves and tell him what they are doing. First Kid: I’m Johnny. I’m just trying to feed biscuit to the lion. Second Kid: I’m Kimberly. I’m also trying to feed biscuit to the lion. Third Kid: I’m Biscuit. 15. My doctor informed me I have 6 months to live. In anger, I shot him dead. I was sentenced 15 years in prison. Problem solved. Conclusion Most individuals do not like revealing their dark side. The dark side of the human psyche is something that you bury deep inside you and that you sometimes do not know you are exhibiting. However, embracing your dark side can open doors to fulfillment and “enlightenment,” In her book “The Dark Side of the Light Chasers” , author Debbie Ford said your dark side is part of your totality as an individual. If you embrace both your good and dark side, you become whole. How to Analyze People The Ultimate Guide to Speed Reading People through Body Language, Facial Expressions & Learning to Decode Personality Types, Motives, Emotions , Intentions and Behaviors By PSYCHOLOGY ED ACADEMY & CARL GOLEMAN Contents — How to Analyze People Introduction Chapter 1: What is Personality? What are the characteristics of personality? But how does personality develop? What do the type theories say? Introvert Vs. Extrovert: A Look At The Spectrum And Psychology Somatypes by William Sheldon Type A and Type B Personality Keirsey Temperament Sorter Takeaway Chapter 3: The Impact of Culture Takeaway Chapter 4: Analyze Personal and Social Aspects Health Appearance Strengths And Weaknesses Beliefs & Values Demographics Environment The Person Lives In Wealth / Financial Status Social Background Chapter 5: Behavior Analysis Establish a baseline Ghee any. deviati ns | from the base ine Passi e Ageessve Chapter 9: How to Spot Insecurity, Bullying Too. Sexual Other aan of Inse curit A F TTE Lis Sociopathic Liars Chapter 12: How to Spot and Read Lies In People and Detect The Mouth Posi ive Body Lan FF age Bodv_Lan Langu age Du EA E Public Speaking sotiations And Sales ere is} een Communication n Style? Conclusion Introduction Personality comes from the Latin word “persona.” This Latin word, however, is more closely associated with putting a front or wearing a mask. Our personalities, on the other hand, are more than just about playacting for other people. Instead, they are the conglomeration of our most consistent behaviors. They provide insight as to how unique we are and as to who we really are. Who we are as a person affects how we see the world and how other people see us. How other people portray themselves is also just as vital to the brew. It is not only what you give that affects the results, but also how it is received. Some people just have the right chemistry. When they meet, they click right away. It may be that their personalities are similar, or it may be that one is complementing the other. This book aims to provide you with enough scientific knowledge to read and analyze people in diverse scenarios. You will identify how your personality can affect how you deal with other people. Similarly, you will learn how other people’s personality affects how you communicate with them. Copyright, Legal Notice and Disclaimer Copyright 2020 All rights reserved In no way it is legal to reproduce, duplicate, or transmit any part of this document in either electronic means or in printed format. Recording of this publication is strictly prohibited and any storage of this document is not allowed unless with written permission from the publisher. All rights reserved. The information provided herein is stated to be truthful and consistent, in that any liability, in terms of inattention or otherwise, by any usage or abuse of any policies, processes, or directions contained within is the solitary and utter responsibility of the recipient reader. Under no circumstances will any legal responsibility or blame be held against the publisher for any reparation, damages, or monetary loss due to the information herein, either directly or indirectly. Respective authors own all copyrights not held by the publisher. Legal Notice This book is copyright protected. This is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part of the content within this book without the consent of the author or copyright owner. Legal action will be pursued if this is breached. Chapter 1: What is Personality? So, you blew up one day at work. Everyone was shocked. Your voice was loud, and there was an apparent attempt to sputter out a curse word or two. Somehow, you managed to hold yourself back. Does this mean that you have an explosive personality? No. It doesn’t. The fact that people were stunned that you did that says it all. Personality relies on a pattern. It is consistent. If you have a habit of screaming every afternoon when you get stressed out at work, then that must be part of your personality. There is also a strong chance that you could get fired. So, what is personality, really? Personality refers to a pattern of thought, emotions, and actions. It also becomes a trademark of yours. People who know you best can already expect what you will do next. If you are an unpredictable person, other people will expect you to regularly surprise them. So, do you only see personality through the way you behave? That is only part of that. Your thoughts, feelings, and tendencies all fall under your character. A sly person, for example, can continue changing their outward behavior. However, his pattern of thought will remain the same. People who have been keenly observing him can also detect the attempts at deception. What are the characteristics of personality? Some of these characteristics have been mentioned when we were attempting to define personality just a bit earlier. One of the things that should remind you about personality is that it is consistent. You have probably heard about the term “character development.” Film viewers and book readers appreciate seeing this in characters. Does it mean that the characters have become inconsistent with their personalities? No, they haven’t. In fact, when these characters do become inconsistent, the readers and viewers feel offended. They believe that the creator does not really understand his characters because even when they do go through some form of development, there is usually a strong reason that can be backed by their personalities. Two, personality is backed by not only a person’s psychological aspects but also his biological or physical characteristics. Behaviors, for example, can be affected by biotic processes. This is why patients with psychological disorders get prescribed with drugs that target neurotransmitter function. Changing how something works within the body somehow changes behavior. Three, personality is not just a little influence on how you act, but it may cause you to behave a certain way. It is not like someone is whispering in your ears to make you do something. Instead, it is you acting a certain way because it is how you are driven. Four, you can express personality in many ways. Some will read your character through the way you talk or how you barely talk. They may see it in your actions, hear it in your selected words, and more. But how does personality develop? No matter how many types of personalities are there that try to categorize you, your character is still unique. There is likely a part of you that provides you a certain slant. After all, everyone has been born to different sets of parents. Even those who share parents differ in age, environment, set of friends, physical health, etc. You can even spot variations between identical twins. Various psychoanalysts had provided their theories on how personality develops. Sigmund Freud focused on psychosexual stages of development. Each stage focuses on an erogenous zone, which has some role to play in the child’s development. A failure in any of these stages can result in fixation. Meanwhile, Erik Erikson cited eight psychosocial stages. He was more interested in how children’s social interactions contributed to their development of ego identity. Though Freud and Erikson might have varying focuses, they both understood the importance of each stage in the development of a healthy personality. Abnormal interactions in any of the levels can cause some problems in the child’s psyche. So, both of them would agree that whatever you expose a person in his childhood will have an effect on the development of his personality. What do the type theories say? Type theories basically group everyone into categories, thus basically saying that everyone belongs to a limited set of types. One such theory groups everyone into four types: A, B, C, and D: Type As are regarded as work and achievement obsessed people who want perfection in everything. They can be competitive and aggressive when something or someone serves as an obstacle to their goals. Type Bs are almost the opposite because they don’t stress themselves too much. They are evenly tempered but have the tendency to become slackers. Type Cs seem to be less aggressive versions of Type As. They are perfectionists and conscientious, but they are not as comfortable with revealing how they feel. Type Ds are your gloom and doom troopers. They do not believe in themselves at all and would rather stay away from other people. Even traits have their unique theories: Theories often touch upon how personality is formed through genetically induced characteristics. Some people are agreeable. They easily connect with other people because they have some empathy for them. Of course, you can note of people who are at the other end of the spectrum — those who find it challenging to deal with other people. Some are even entirely disagreeable. Some people are conscientious. They have goals, and they know how to work towards those. They can be relied upon. On the other end, we have people who simply do not think of the results of their actions. Another trait that people are judged upon is their being eager to please . These are people who want to conform and to be able to deliver what is expected. Again, not everyone is like that. Extraversion versus introversion has been commonly discussed nowadays. Some people are more friendly and gain their strength from their external communications, while others have to be alone for some time to regain the energy they have lost interacting with others. People are also checked for neuroticism. They tend to feel anxious all the time and can get upset quickly after being exposed to stress. Neurotic people may have been exposed to stressors during their vital developmental stages. Open people are ready to explore new things. They are more creative and willing to take on surprises along the way. Of course, people are combinations of the above. Again, every one of us is unique. So, we are a combination of many aspects, affected not just by genetics but also by our environments and other experiences. Psychodynamic Theories The psychodynamic theories of Sigmund Freud and Erik Erikson have been previously mentioned. New theories that fall under this category are still largely influenced by Freud’s dependence on what the unconscious mind does to our personalities. Freud and Erikson both refer to stages in development that we could refer to when analyzing present behavior. It is no wonder that subsequent psychodynamic theories follow Freud’s own. It was Freud who first recognized how the unconscious affects the way people behave. Psychodynamic theories also divide personality into three parts: the id, ego, and superego. The id refers to the genetic components of personality. It includes the Eros (sex/life) and Thanatos (aggressive/death) instincts, which are intrinsic to the person. The ego develops to help you align yourself with the world’s expectations. The superego makes use of the society’s morals, which they learn from their parents as well as other people, especially close mentors. The id and the superego are both unconscious parts of your mind. They usually battle against your conscious mind, which is your ego. These conflicts may make you anxious. So, the ego may end up taking out some defense mechanisms. Behavioral Theories According to behavioral theories, your personality is the sum of your interactions with your environment. Only your observable behaviors are included in these studies. So, your thoughts may not factor in. You may say that this goes against the description of what a personality is — and you are right. However, scientists have been trying to find a way to get a tangible assessment of people’s behaviors. If you are in the academe, you will notice that the names of behavioral theorists are familiar. The likes of B. F. Skinner and John B. Watson have become a veritable part of teaching and discipline. Learning is observed through observable behaviors and patterns. Of course, teachers will not be able to read the students’ minds to see if their thoughts somehow surpass what they are showing via the application of their knowledge. Humanist Theories There are also the humanist theories in personality to consider. Here, there is an emphasis on how each person faces his environment and responds to it through his own free will. Carl Rogers emphasized self actualization. So, an individual knowingly contributes to the development of his personality. Rogers believed that each person begins to have a concept of who he is. So, he starts responding to continuous stimuli according to how he sees himself. Abraham Maslow also believes in self actualization. He formulates a hierarchy of needs, with physiological demands placed right at the bottom of the pyramid. So, breathing, eating, sex, excretion, and other processes that are required for survival fall under this section. A step above this is Safety. Here, we see employment, resources, morality, and more. Love and belonging go after that, encompassing family, friendships, and sexual intimacy. After achieving these, a person can start looking out for his esteem. After that, he may say that he has finally reached the pinnacle of the hierarchy — at self actualization. While Rogers and Maslow present pretty compelling stuff about personality, their studies are not considered rigorous. In fact, some even say that these studies do not have empirical evidence. Despite this, people do like the idea of each individual having some say in how he can finally achieve the best of himself. Humanistic theories do not leave people in fatalistic views of what life could be. Introvert Vs. Extrovert Tests, such as the Myers Briggs test, have been formulated to gauge whether a person has introverted or extroverted tendencies. Isabel Briggs Myers co authored the personality inventory with her mother, Katharine Cook Briggs. The questions were said to have been formulated with Carl Jung’s theories in mind. Jung conceptualized that people’s behaviors depend on four psychological functions: sensation, intuition, feeling, and thinking. Through these primary functions, and a person’s introversion or extraversion, the Briggs Myers test can identify 16 distinct personalities. The Briggs Myer test identifies 8 variations of introverts. As mentioned earlier, these are people who lose a lot of energy when they have to mingle with other people. They need time to be alone to reenergize. It does not mean that they will hide from others all the time. They usually are more in touch with their inner thoughts. Introverts excel in observing other people and knowing just what to do in every situation. It does not mean that they will be comfortable with any of those possible actions. The test also identifies 8 types of extroverts. Extroverts are more comfortable with socialization. They will more likely blurt out what they have been meaning to say all along. Extroverts excel in being able to form networks to connect with more people. Chapter 2: Personality Types Theories and Assessments Methodologies People are all different. We know that just by observing others. However, psychologists continue to find means to categorize behaviors. We have to admit behaviors and personalities are complex and compelling. Wouldn’t you want to know how come other people think one way, while others have their own take of the same thing? Introvert Vs. Extrovert: A Look At The Spectrum And Psychology In Chapter 1, we have already looked at how people are divided into introverts and extroverts. Put simply, introverts gain energy when they are alone. They lose a lot when they are dealing with other people. So, no, they do not totally eschew other people’s company, but they get raggedly tired when they have to socialize. On the other hand, extroverts recharge when they are with other people. They thrive in the buzz and energy of others. These extremes may sometimes confuse some people who feel as if they are neither one nor the other — or perhaps even both. This is why some personality assessments address the existence of a spectrum. You may say that some people are more introverted than others. Some may have strong introverted qualities but can still be convinced to participate in regular parties — if with close friends. On the other hand, some extroverts may also feel relieved about getting some needed rest from social activities. Northwestern University’s Dr. Dan McAdams recognizes introversion extroversion as one continuous dimension. There are gradients, instead of sharp delineations, between the closest subtypes. This is because each regular person takes some characteristics from both the introverted and the extroverted qualities. Even at the workplace, the differences can be sensed. Extroverts, for example, love the hustle and bustle of a packed schedule. They do not mind being sent to various places or asked to meet new people. Being relegated to the desk job frustrates and bores them. So, they end up not doing much that was expected of them. Introverts are their polar opposites. Noise and ever changing schedules frazzle them. So, they get easily distracted by these. They would instead prefer working in a stable and mellow environment, wherein their plans are clear, and the setup is pristine. Then, somewhere cut between the introverts and the extroverts come the ambiverts. Ambiverts possess a combination of features from introverts and extroverts. Somatypes by William Sheldon If you have conducted any sort of research on exercise and nutrition, then you may have come across the various body types: ectomorph, mesomorph, and endomorph. Most of us, however, would not think of these body types beyond what they can help us in terms of the right exercise and diet methods. William Sheldon, however, had successfully conducted research on these body shapes to relate them to personality traits. An ectomorph is described as someone with a lighter body type. He has less defined muscles and lighter bones. He may be described as slim and may seem taller than he really is. Somehow, their personalities also reflect this “lightness.” Ectomorphs are known for being more emotionally sensitive. A mesomorph, on the other hand, has a balanced combination of muscle and bones. People with well defined muscles that seem to suggest a regular workout fall under this category. There is a strong possibility that he may not even be doing any workouts. Muscle building and success in physical activities come naturally for the mesomorph. Just as his body can be sturdy, the mesomorph’s emotional perseverance can also be noted. This capacity for emotional strength and endurance can be observed more when contrasted with the ectomorph. Finally, the endomorph has a soft and round body. He gains more weight in the abdominal area, while his hands and feet are comparably small. Endomorphs are generally regarded as fun and sociable. While the above may seem to make sense to you because they reflect the body type and personalities of people you know, not everyone can be easily classified. Most people will still end up a combination of the three body types and their equivalent characteristics. You may even find some people going against type, especially if you cannot easily describe their body structure. Type A and Type B Personality Then, we go back to Type A and Type B personalities. We have glanced at the comparison of these two leading personalities. Type A personalities refer to people who have a cutthroat way of getting what they want. They are ambitious and can be very hard on themselves. Because of this, they can hardly relax. Instead, they like pursuing various goals. Type As are competitive and very focused. However, they may get frustrated when plans do not go their way. Type B personalities are more relaxed. They can be so laidback that other people may think that they are not capable of achieving success. They are. However, they may take a more casual route. This may be good for stress, but not necessarily for tight schedules and strict work schemes. Procrastination may be their primary enemy. Type A and Type B personalities develop because of several factors. Genes may be a cause. Of course, the upbringing of the family may have a powerful influence. After all, a person brought up in a Type A family may more likely manifest the same characteristics. Type Bs can also be inherited or passed on. What you see in your environment as a child will make a significant mark on you. Both types have their pros and cons. The driven type A will hurtle towards his goal no matter what. He will make sure that what needs to be done will be done. However, because of their strict regard for rules and targets, they may not work that well with others. They may also be more likely to develop stress related health conditions. On the other hand, relaxed type B will provide a comfortable and easy going atmosphere, which team members will appreciate. He just needs to have more driving force to get the goals done. With less stress, type B can be less prone to cardiovascular illnesses but should know when he should apply himself to succeed. Whatever the case may be, we mustn’t judge anyone based on his personality type. Myer Briggs 16 Personality Types And Indicator (MBTI) The Myer Briggs personality test has become pretty prevalent because of social media. 16 distinct types have arisen from the general types (introversion and extroversion) and some distinctive traits. Each of these MBTI types is represented by four letters. The combinations all come from the following: I — Introvert E — Extrovert S — sensing N — intuiting T — thinking F — feeling J — judging P perceiving ISTJ ISFJ INFJ INTJ Inspector Protector Counselor Mastermind Doing What Should|| A High Sense of || An Inspiration to || Everything Has Room Be Done Duty Others for Improvement ISTP ISFP INFP INTP Crafter Composer Healer Architect Ready to Try Sees Much But Performing Noble || A Love of Problem Service to Aid solving Shares Little Society Anything Once ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP Promoter Performer Champion Inventor The Ultimate xou Only “0 Giving Life an Extra ne ; Around Once in Challenge After Realist Squeeze Life ESFJ Another ENTJ ESTJ ENFJ Supervisor Provider Teacher Fieldmarshal er Hosts and . Life a Hostesses of the Smooth talking Life's Natural Leaders Administrators World Persuader ISTJ — “The Inspector” The Inspector is an introvert. So, it goes without saying that Inspectors are quiet and reserved. However, because of the unique combination of Introverted Sensing Thinking Judging, they are mainly known for being great planners. They are also very observant. However, this type is not without its fault. The Inspector can be quite judgmental and may be insensitive. In their quest to be focused and organized, they may blame others when things are less than perfect. Examples of Suitable Careers: e Accountant e Computer Analyst/Programmer e Dentist e Detective e Doctor e Librarian e Lawyer ISTP — “The Crafter” The Crafter may not be as expressive as extroverts, but they are creative. They are also fond of taking on new experiences, which goes against the usual concept of what an introvert is. Crafters like risky activities, but they try to stay away from their own emotions, a tricky balance achieved while also expressing themselves well. They also try to stay away from other people’s emotions, a surprise coming from an introvert who is supposed to have more insight into these situations. The self confident Crafter is challenging to pin down in terms of reading their emotions and getting them to commit. Examples of Suitable Careers e Computer programmer e Carpenter e Electrician e Engineer e Firefighter e Forensic scientist e Mechanic e Pilot e Police Officer e Scientist e Software engineer e Video game designer ISFJ — “The Protector” Reliable and warm hearted, The Protector remembers so many details about others to make them feel special. They are traditional and practical, and may generally seem old fashioned. Because of their traditional values, a Protector has provided himself the task of looking out for others. Sometimes, this becomes detrimental to their own well being. While they may be introverts, they are rooted in reality. Examples of Suitable Careers e Accountant e Administrator e Banker e Bookkeeper e Child care provider e Counselor e Nurse e Office Manager e Paralegal e Social worker e Teacher ISFP — “The Artist” Artists may be introverts, but they do not like worrying about the future. Instead, they would rather take care of the Now. So, they are “doers,” solving problems right away instead of worrying about what to do with them. These easy going introverts would rather get some practical things done instead of daydreaming. While mingling with other people takes away a lot of their energy, they do enjoy the outdoors and interactions with animals. Examples of Suitable Careers e Artist e Chef e Designer e Forest ranger e Musician e Nurse e Naturalist e Pediatrician e Psychologist e Social worker e Teacher e Veterinarian INF J — “The Advocate” The idealistic Advocate needs some time off from people, just like other introverts. However, they do enjoy helping other people and making a difference in the real world. When they do make decisions, they still rely a lot on their personal opinions and feelings over objective facts. Despite this, they do drive away any tendencies to daydream because they take charge through organizing and planning. Examples of Suitable Careers e Actor e Artist e Counselor e Entrepreneur e Librarian e Musician e Photographer e Psychologist e Religious worker e Teacher e Writer INFP — “The Mediator” The Mediator has a way of looking at the big picture. Unfortunately, this perspective makes them lose their sight of the little details. A bundle of contradictions, the Mediator is great at fostering close relationships but is challenging to get to know. Moreover, they care a lot about other people but still prefer to work alone. Someone who is a mix of seemingly clashing characteristics would make for a good mediator or middle person. Examples of Suitable Careers e Artist e Counselor e Graphic Designer e Librarian e Psychologist e Physical Therapist e Social Worker e Writer INTJ — “The Architect” The hard working Architect is willing to discuss theoretical concepts. In fact, he enjoys the challenge of getting into them. He is good at listening to other people, even to the point of being open to constructive criticism. The Architect wants to feel in control. So, he makes his plans in advance and depends on objectivity rather than feelings. Examples of Suitable Careers e Dentist e Doctor e Engineer e Judge e Lawyer e Mathematician e Scientist e Teacher INTP — “The Thinker” As the name suggests, the Thinker lives in his thoughts. However, this does not mean to say that he does not know how to live beyond that. He can be very affectionate to his family and friends. This powerful abstract thinker is good at analyzing raw data and conceptual ideas. However, because of the pull of his inner world, some may misunderstand him and believe him to be insensitive. He can be insensitive, too, for real but he can also be riddled with self doubt. Examples of Suitable Careers e Chemist e Computer programmer e Engineer e Forensic scientist e Geologist e Mathematician e Pharmacist e Physicist e Software developer ESTP — “The Persuader” From the very name of this personality type, the Persuader knows a thing or more about influencing others. He is adaptable and resourceful. So, he knows how to change his ways to suit the situation and the person he is talking to. He does this by being observant. However, the Persuader can also get bored very quickly. He is used to getting a lot of action done and does not like a lull amid the proceedings. Examples of Suitable Careers e Computer support technician e Detectives e Entrepreneur e Marketer e Paramedic e Police officer e Sales agent ESTJ — “The Director” The Director has a take charge way of handling things. He is very traditional with his approach. He has strong leadership skills, as suggested by the name, but he can also act put his money where his mouth is. Why? The Director is a hard working and reliable person. So, he just expects other people to be the same. Other people may not see eye to eye with him because he can be quite frank and argumentative. Some people may even describe him as bossy. Examples of Suitable Careers e Accountant e Banker e Business manager e Judge e = Military e Police officer e Politician e School administrator e Teacher ESFP — “The Performer” The Performer is often easy to spot because he is the entertainer or even the class clown of every group. What people may misunderstand about him is that he is not always doing it just for the attention. Performers genuinely enjoy engaging with other people. Their brimming optimism about life is what makes them a lot easier for them to be sociable. These spontaneous people always need stimuli, or they will quickly get bored. Performers live for today, but do not plan for tomorrow. Examples of Suitable Careers e Actor e Artist e Athletic coach e Counselor e Fashion designer e Human resources specialist e Musician e Psychologist e Social worker ESF J — “The Caregiver” The Caregiver is the extroverted version of the Protector. This outgoing version of the ISFJ gains pleasure from helping other people. They are dependable and organized, which allows themselves and their cause. However, because of their efforts to sense and provide people’s needs, they also have a tendency to want to be recognized. They genuinely want to help, but also seek the approval of others and can be quite needy in their quest for this. Examples of Suitable Careers e Bookkeeper e Childcare Provider e Counselor e Nurse e Office manager e Physician e Receptionist e Social worker e Teacher ENFP — “The Champion” Champions are a creative and gregarious bunch. They strongly empathize with people and have the communication skills to back them up. A Champion manages to combine his love for fun and his caring attitude. So, he is not just out there to live his best life, but he is concerned about others doing the same. However, he also has the tendency not to follow the rules. Stress can quickly frustrate him, which cannot be helped by his disorganized ways and overly emotional stance. Examples of Suitable Careers e Actor e Counselor e Journalist e Nurse e Nutritionist e Politician e Psychologist e Social Worker e TV Reporter ENF J — “The Giver” If you want to meet the ultimate people person, then it would be the Giver. The Giver has a broad social circle, and he freely engages with its members. He is warm hearted. So, it is typical for the Giver to encourage people he has some influence over. Yes, he does have an easy way of influencing people, which is tempered by his desire to sacrifice himself for others. Because he absorbs emotions as he communicates with contacts, he can be overly sensitive and seek the approval of others. Examples of Suitable Careers e Counselor e Human resources manager e Manager e Psychologist e Sales representative e Social worker e Teacher ENTP — “The Debater” The social web that The Debater spins is reliant on the pursuit of knowledge. He interacts with others to exchange knowledge and intellectual conversations. He enjoys a good debate of ideas, thus the name of this personality type. However, when he gets caught up in his views, he can be argumentative and insensitive to other people’s opinions. He does not like other people controlling him and his schedules. Examples of Suitable Careers e Engineer e Inventor e Journalist e Lawyer e Psychiatrist e Psychologist e Scientist ENTJ — “The Commander” Finally, the 16 Myers Briggs personality types conclude with The Commander. The name suggests that this type is in no way in the last place for anything. The Commander is a born leader. He comes with strong communication skills and the assertiveness that is needed in an effective leader. The Commander has a sense of organization and decisiveness that can carry the whole team towards success. However, he needs to be more sensitive and more patient for the venture to be a serene team effort. He also has the tendency to be aggressive and stubborn. Examples of Suitable Careers e Business analyst e CEO e Entrepreneur e Human resources manager e Lawyer e Scientist e Software developer e University professor The 9 Enneagram Personality Types Another way of looking at personality is through the 9 Enneagram Personality Types. Some may opt to choose the Enneagram to understand themselves or other people. However, it is not unprecedented for people to dig deep and explore both the Enneagram and the MBTI. The official Enneagram test, as of writing, costs $12 for a one time take. It will provide the test taker the number that represents his Enneagram personality types. The numbers go from 1 to 9. The Enneagram 9. Peacemaker Mediator 1. Reformer Perfectionist 8. Leader Challenger 7. Enthusiast 2. Helper Epicure Caretaker 6. Loyalist 3. Achiever Questioner Performer 5. Thinker 4. Individualist Observer Tragic Romantic The Geometric Symbol of the Enneagram Personalities After you have gotten your results, you can check what your Enneagram meaning means: 1: The Reformer The Reformer is described as ideological. He usually serves as the moral compass, with his self controlled ways and tendency to be perfectionistic. 2: The Helper The Helper tends to lean towards people pleasing and being generous to others. He just needs to temper his tendency to be possessive, as well. 3: The Achiever The Achiever is always aware of his progress and status. So, he is driven to excel, adapt, and maintain his image. 4: The Individualist The Individualist is a sensitive and dramatic type. He can be very temperamental and prone to self absorption. 5: The Investigator The Investigator is secretive, cerebral type. He can be quite intense but can work alone because of his powers of perception. 6: The Loyalist The Loyalist is concerned about where commitment lies. He is so focused and security and loyalty that he is suspicious that others may not be the same way. 7: The Enthusiast The Enthusiast is fun loving and sees the good in everything. Unfortunately, he can also be quite distracted and scattered. 8: The Challenger The Challenger has an overpowering self confidence. He uses it to be willful and decisive in his own goals. However, he can also use this to be confrontational. 9: The Peacemaker The Peacemaker will agree to just about anything to maintain the peace. He is very receptive to other people’s emotions and will provide a reassuring voice to others. Myer Briggs Vs. Enneagram: Key Differences Now that you have seen both the MBTI and the Enneagram, you can see that they categorize people into types. Each type has a distinctive set of characteristics. Now, what about the differences between the two? Nature versus Nurture Don Richard Riso and Russ Hudson have formulated the Enneagram with nurture in mind. For the Enneagram types, they can even point out from which parent the person has gotten his characteristics. Riso and Hudson believe that personalities emerge based on children’s early experiences. On the other hand, the Myers Briggs personalities stem from Carl Jung’s theories. These personalities are more rooted in nature. It is believed that people are born with those personalities and continue to develop them as they grow up and gather more experiences. Negative Traits Both the Myer Briggs and the Enneagram describe negative traits. Myer Briggs always mentions the weaknesses of each type. It also cites an inferior set of attributes, which refer to characteristics that are not very commonly associated with the category but would be worth exploring and bringing to the fore. The Enneagram, on the other hand, introduces the 9 personalities together with their central vices. Analytical versus Holistic Because Jung is analytical, the Myers Briggs personalities take on a more structured setup. Each of the 16 personality types makes use of one of each of the four dichotomies that the MBTI uses. So, each type has a lot of details. On the other hand, the Enneagram is more holistic. Instead of a structured definition, each Enneagram type is assigned a highly known title that everyone has a clear notion about. For example, the Achiever calls into mind various driven people and what they usually do to reach their goals Both the MTBI and the Enneagram can help you understand yourself and other people. However, you may have a preference. Would you like an in depth description that relies on dichotomies, or would you like a holistic title that basically represents an accepted set of characteristics? Keirsey Temperament Sorter Personality sorting does not end with MTBI and Enneagram Types. American psychologist David Keirsey has formulated the temperament sorter with concepts drawn from Kretschmer. Kretschmer was the one who modeled the four temperaments. Though Kretschmer’s research has also been proven to be valuable to the Myers Briggs categorization, the Keirsey Temperament Sorter is more interested in observable behavior rather than what a person is thinking and feeling. How do you find out your Keirsey Temperament? You will have to take a 70 item test. You will only be given choices between two answers for every question. You will not be asked about what you can do, but rather about what you would prefer. The Four Temperaments 1 Artisan The Artisan is stimulated by tools and anything tangible. They can seamlessly adapt to a dynamic environment. They prefer to see some practical action because they like to make an impact in the world. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Composer (ISFP) e Crafter (ISTP) e Performer (ESFP) e Promoter (EFTP) 2 Guardian The Guardian also gravitates towards the practical and concrete. He, however, seeks security that he can also provide to others. He has an organized set of behaviors, so he does well in logistics. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Inspector (ISTJ) e Protector (ISFJ) e Provider (ESFJ) e Supervisor (ESTJ) 3 Idealist The Idealist is an abstract thinker and tends to have lofty ideas. He is always driven towards finding true identity and meaning in his life. He will continue working towards personal growth but also knows how to be diplomatic and compassionate to others. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Architect (INTP) e Fieldmarshall (ENTJ) e Inventor (ENTP) e Mastermind (INTJ) 4 Rational A Rational person is also an abstract thinker like the Idealist. However, his thoughts are propelled by strategy and mastery. In short, he is very objective and makes use of his competence and skill to do well in his tasks. Subtypes, with MBTI equivalents: e Champion (ENFP) e Counselor (INFJ) e Healer (INFP) e Teacher (ENFJ) Takeaway Now that you know how personalities can be categorized and even sub categorized, you can take some tests to see which ones represent you and the people in your social circles. Knowing a person’s personality type or subtype does not mean that you are trying to put him in a box. In this case, you will not use labels to limit people. Instead, you will use them to understand their motivations, fears, and dreams. Chapter 3: The Impact of Culture Vier A aa Experiences, especially during childhood, have an impact on the person and ultimately decide whether they will grow up neurotic or normal. Some theories however lean more towards concluding that nature cannot be changed. A person can still oscillate between neurotic and normal and possibly settle on one side, but he is already a product of his genetics. He is born that way. The effects of experiences are still controlled by the intrinsic qualities that he has. Culture can have a substantial impact on how a personality gets developed. After all, culture commands what is acceptable in the current society. What may be permitted in the United States, for example, may not be admissible in Japan. So, a person who is known for his conformity in the United States may not necessarily be able to adapt just as quickly when in Japan. Here are some points that you should know on the relationship of culture with other factors that affect your personality. Family and genetics affect how culture impacts your personality Whatever culture you are born in, it is ultimately still your family that decides whether you let it influence you. Your parents will be the first ones to introduce you to your culture and what it means to you. They can tell you that it is crucial to conform. On the other hand, they may ask you to go against the norm. You can choose what external factors affect you Even with a strong cultural background, you are a free person. You can decide which external factors you want to be continuously exposed to. You don’t have to accept everything in blind faith. However, your exposure to your culture and religion, as well as your previous experiences, will decide whether you will want to separate yourself from your culture in the first place. Shifting to a completely different cultural system As you grow older, you get to know your culture better. You also may get exposed to other cultures, through media or through travel. Through these experiences, you will discover whether you can relate to your own culture or to another. In your freedom, you can choose to let another culture system become your basis for how you live your life. Takeaway Though you have the freedom to shed what your culture has taught you, it is not that easy to completely discard its effects. The ease in which you do it will depend on your relationship with your country, family, religion, and culture as a whole. Chapter 4: Analyze Personal and Social Aspects Bid S S28 be eee AI OSA Dl SAMME LEPET ET Eee Ble HiSAM 2 Gens CENA DIEE da a CETE VAAN Every little aspect of a person, even the way he breathes or fidgets, will say something about him. It is not enough to say that a person is an ISTJ. It is not enough to say that the person is a Mediator. You have to go closer and add the little details to get a full, clearer picture of who he is. Below are some aspects that you can include in analyzing a person. Health Health can be a powerful factor in how a person behaves. You must not judge a person right away. Look closely. A person who is not feeling well will more likely act grumpy. Of course, some like to hold things in. They will say they are “okay,” but their physical appearance can give you some hints. For example, he may say he is okay, but he looks pale and weak. Appearance Appearance can say so much about a person, more than his just his fashion sense. A person can look disheveled all the time, for example. You may initially think that this person does not know how to take care of himself. However, that may be the case. If his work and the way he dresses outside of the office also look sloppy, then he may be consistently not making an effort. Strengths And Weaknesses You need to have observed the person long enough to find out about his strengths and weaknesses. Someone can tell you his strengths and weaknesses. Then, you can confirm the verity of the information. However, it is still best to make the observations yourself, especially when the person is not aware he is being observed. This is not to say that the person is lying. The person may still be in the process of getting to know himself, as well. Beliefs & Values A belief system — religious or not — can determine a person’s decision and next move. A person’s belief system also decides what he will prioritize. For example, you will catch a glimpse of his priorities by making him draft a list. Through experience, though, you will find out if he does stick to his beliefs or not. Some people are also more unpredictable. Demographics While it is not fair to judge people according to their age, gender, religion, etc. it may provide you with some insights. Each of these demographics descriptions will give you an idea of how the person will act and what he believes. However, do not forget the possible outliers. For example, not all females will lean towards picking frilly, pink things. Similarly, not every married person will be responsible enough to say no to a night out when he has not arranged for a babysitter yet. Of course, these outlying behavior also provides you with more information about the person’s character. The combination of demographics may also enlighten you further. Environment The Person Lives In Sometimes when you say where you live, people react — outwardly or inwardly depending on the person’s character. Places have their own reputations. They also say a lot about the person. For example, an affluent neighborhood can tell you that the person is most likely on the wealthier side of the spectrum. On the other hand, the person may be living in a room there because he feels he will be safer in such a neighborhood. We all have our belief systems and notions about things. There is another way of looking at how a person’s environment affects his character and behavior. SOme people, for example, can be quiet and earnest when they are at work but know how to have fun outside of it. Wealth / Financial Status Wealth may not be a straightforward way of defining character, but it influences a lot of decisions and choices. A wealthy person will more likely make quick decisions when it comes to spending. He has enough extra money to risk. He will tend to buy more expensive brands. Of course, some rich people do know how to save money, but they have wider options. They can choose to go for the brand they prefer. Those who have tighter budgets often do not have a choice but to pick the less expensive — even cheap — purchases. To remain responsible, they have to say no to possible extravagant options. Social Background A person’s social background has a substantial influence on him. The more stable his social connections are, the less likely he will be neurotic. As for social status, it provides a clue as to how a person sees himself and behaves. Cultural Background Two people from different cultural backgrounds will more likely behave differently from each other. If they do behave similarly, then you may have to look at different sets of motivations. Perhaps one is reacting normally, while the other is trying to fit in. The willingness to make adjustments despite their strong cultural background will give you another insight into people. If you are genuinely interested in a person, then you should delve into his cultural background. Perhaps he is friendlier than he seems to appear but is limited by his cultural beliefs. Profession Each person has a role to play. Teachers are expected to be patient and excellent at communicating. Doctors are expected to be caring. In an office setting, the employer will behave differently from the employee. Now, it does not mean to say that all employees will behave the same. However, the role has a significant influence on how you act around certain people. Attitude One of the more transparent ways to understand a person is through his attitude. It is also to look at the person closely when he does not know he is being observed. His reaction and attitude to various people, situations, and events will give you an idea as to who this person really is. Attitude is the result of personality traits. Does he have a positive or negative way of looking at life and treating other people? Circle Of Friends Well, there is a saying about how birds of the same feather flock together. By knowing a person’s friends, you form an idea as to who he is. His friends are people he enjoys spending time with. He must have found some kinship with these people. It does not mean that he will be exactly the same as them, but he finds something that he likes. Why would someone spend a lot of time with people they dislike? Parents Herein, we will look at another saying. People usually say that the fruit does not fall far from the tree. It is true to some extent. Children who are raised by their biological parents have both their nature and nature coming from their father and mother. Some children are closer to one parent, and thus take on that parent’s set of beliefs and behavior. Others are combinations of both parents, creating in themselves a unique mix. Parents are also the ones that usually introduce culture, religion, social standing, and more, to their children. Role Models Growing up, a person begins to turn to role models. Those who have parents who are generally caring and there for them will hail their parents as their first superheroes. As they become more exposed to various forms of media, children recognize other role models. These are people who represent something that they want for themselves. If a person tells you about his role models, then you will discover a lot about that person and his dreams. Interests And Hobbies It is easy to find out what a person’s interests and hobbies are. They are willing to share these in casual conversation. Through a person’s interests and hobbies, you will find out the things that make him happy. By knowing these, you may also get some insight into a person. Goals And Objectives By knowing a person’s goals and objectives, you get a glimpse of what drives him to get up in the mornings. What keeps them going? What is making them feel a certain way? Will they be willing to continue going even when there is a lot of strife? Preference In Food & Beverages Health conscious people will gravitate towards low calorie, highly nutritious food and drinks. They are more likely to be careful with their overall well being. However, you may also notice people who take this so seriously that it has become unhealthy. If you see that a person has been barely eating and is already skin and bones, then something is very wrong. You may need to intervene or ask someone who can. Others will be likely to choose protein rich foods. If this is backed by a muscular physique, then you know that the person has been consciously packing himself with meat for bodybuilding. Takeaway So, one human being takes a lot of details to read. Yes, you will have an easier time understanding someone by identifying his MBTI, Keirsey Temperament, and Enneagram number. However, seeing the person in action in real life will give you a broader look at him beyond tests. After all, sometimes, you find yourself caught up between two types, not quite sure where you are. People are, after all, more complicated than categorized personality types. Chapter 5: Behavior Analysis When you are analyzing someone’s behavior, you must heighten your observation skills. Practice with yourself and those around you first so that you have a tighter grasp of how people behave in several types of situations. You should also be more familiar with facial expressions and their equivalent meanings. You have started making these observations since you were a baby. At a tender age, you must have noticed when your mother was not paying attention as you would want her. You were used to her smiling at you that you started fussing as you saw her poker face. As a child, you knew just when to act a certain way. If you wanted to request something from your parents, you would wait when they were in a great mood. This does not mean that you were walking on eggshells around them, but that you know that sometimes the timing should be perfect. You had been conducting some behavior analysis as a young child, and you did not know it then — not yet. For a more focused and targeted way of analyzing behavior, here are some steps to follow. Establish a baseline When analyzing someone’s behavior, you must have a baseline. You can take this in two ways. One, if you have the opportunity to see the same person several times, then it is easy for you to see what is considered normal behavior for him. Take note of what is normal for this person. Is he naturally loud or quiet? Does he like to mingle or keep to himself? If you have enough observed patterns, then changes will stand out when they happen. Two, you can also interpret the baseline as the behavior of a person compared to the rest of the same group. Is his behavior typical in his type of work? Is he an outlier in his group? You would know this if you have also observed the rest of the team. Observe any deviations from the baseline After establishing the baseline, you should be able to recognize any deviations from it. Is the quiet person suddenly animated and talking a lot? What could have changed? Is the person who usually conforms with what is required in the group suddenly rebelling? What could have happened to make this change? Examine how the person behaves with different groups Since you have started looking at how a person behaves with groups, try to see that person in various groups. Does he change the way he acts from one group or another? Some people, for example, are louder when they are with their close friends and a lot quieter with their office colleagues. However, his overall personality is still consistent with who he is. Read gestures If you can read body language, then you have quite an advantage. It gives you the ability to know what someone is feeling at any given time. The whole pattern of gestures and behavior can create a personality portrait for you. When you are observing gestures, you can start looking at the face. Some typical expressions are easy to read: pouts, frowns, smiles, and grimaces. However, these expressions can be quickly interpreted when you don’t have grey areas to watch out for. Some people may give you a broad smile that does not reach their eyes, for example. So, you must be wary of the baseline, context, and the rest of the person’s body. When it comes to the body, you may look at the posture for clues as to what the person’s mood is. Is he happy or sad? Is he confident, or does he have low self esteem? The flick of the person’s wrist, the movement of his hands, and the general ease of his body around you can tell you a whole story. On the opposite end of this story, you will find a rigid stance and a body that almost refuses to reveal anything. Watch how the person walks Moving on from the gestures, you may look at the way a person walks. The way a person walks can reveal so much about his personality, too. Some like to take quick steps as if they are always in a rush. Others may take things slowly, making time for the details that surround them. It is not just in the speed, either. You may notice that some people take definite steps, while others may shuffle. So, you know which one makes a beeline for his destination, having his plan set out clearly. Others may look as if they are not interested in reaching the end. Zero in on action words When you are talking to someone, you need to focus on the terms that they use. Some words will reveal just what they really mean. For example, people who may use the words “probably,” “maybe,” and vague phrases such as “they say,” may either be not that sure of themselves or are not prepared. You have to compare these words to their baselines. If they always like to use such words, they are not confident. If they only did so during a presentation, then they are not ready. They have not done the work, so they chose to use wishy washy terms. You may want to rely upon people who say “decided,” confirmed,” and other such actionable words. These are people you can rely upon. Of course, you do have to continue comparing these to their baselines. 3) 66 Listen for confidence and command In a group, is there always someone who looks like they are in command? You entered the room for the first time, not really knowing who these people are. Then, your eyes zero in on one of them. The person looks you in the eye, gives you a friendly smile, and his body language is open. He may or may not say, “hello.” I bet you will be surprised if the group suddenly revealed that this person is not the leader. If he turns out to be the leader, then you will likely not be surprised. You felt it. You saw it in the way he handled himself. However, if he turns out to be just another member, and the leader is somewhere in the room, less conspicuous, you may start questioning how the group works. There are a lot of possibilities: e The confident person is not that responsible, but he likes providing personal relations. e The leader is not that confident, but the rest of the team wants to give him a chance. e The group believes that each person must take on the leadership role. e The confident person has the right set of characteristics but does not have the right politics to support him. Whatever the case may be, a confident person will reveal himself pretty quickly in a group setting. This is the person that your eyes will be drawn to. Do all self confident people take on the reins? No, not really. Use what you know about personalities You know what to look for. You have looked at several subtypes of personalities. Now, you need to use what you know about them. e Start with the most apparent characteristics: introvert or extrovert? e What type of introvert or extrovert? e Is the person consistently introverted or extroverted, across various groups? e Does he display a lot of gestures, or are more rigid? e Does he embody a particular type of person: Mediator, Champion, Healer, etc.? e Are they very open with their feelings? While you may be able to pinpoint the MBTI, Enneagram, and Keirsey Temperament of a person, you still have to look into the details. Even when two people have the same MBTI, Enneagram number, and Keirsey Temperament, they cannot be precisely the same. There will still be distinctive differences based on their social and cultural backgrounds and a whole lot of other aspects of their lives. Again, knowing people beyond what they are described as in writing is still the best way of reading and analyzing them. Being able to list and express their personality types is just the beginning. One of the ways you can be more in touch with other people’s personalities is through your own. Be more aware of your facial expressions, gestures, and how you deal with others. Examine what you are actually feeling deep inside whenever you are acting a certain way. Look in the mirror. Check what your smile looks like when you are sad and merely trying to get by. What is the difference between that smile and that grin that you use when you are genuinely pleased? As you become more familiar with yourself and with how other people behave, you can rely on a different set of clues for reading and analyzing people. The 8 point list above shows how you can read and analyze people based on tangible clues. The list below reveals ways in which you can gauge personality through instinct: T; Use intuitive empathy Sometimes, you find yourself talking to a person and really feeling what they are feeling. You can understand their situation and sometimes even take it as your own. When this happens, you may have found someone you comprehend at a higher level, or you may have discovered someone who is a lot like you. Once you realize that a person is a lot like you, you can better analyze his motivations. More likely, they will be similar to yours. 2. Follow your gut feeling It may be challenging to explain, but there are times that you just have a gut feeling about a person. Some may even accuse you of being prejudiced against or for this person for some reason. You confuse yourself at times when you end up welcoming a generally unlikable person or disliking a seemingly pleasant one. Sometimes, past experiences with people create an inner radar. It makes you more sensitive to people who may be presenting themselves in a different light. 3: Rely on insight and Deja Vu Sudden flashes of insight may not be scientific, but they can provide you with warning signs or inspiration. Because you have suddenly thought of something that was not part of your current train of thought, you can change your point of view to examine a different detail about the person you are analyzing. Takeaway Using scientific methods, the powers of observation, and the gift of insight, you can create a personality profile. You do need to mingle with more people so that you can better understand humanity as a whole. Chapter 6: Communication Styles gaa En a a EE gg aad m £] People communicate differently, too. Sometimes when you are not used to someone’s communication style, you may even get offended. You wonder if you have done something wrong when, in fact, the person deals with everyone in the same way. When establishing a person’s baseline, you should be made aware of his communication style. Here are the four primary communication styles. Passive You may end up liking or disliking the passive communicator. On the one hand, he is very inoffensive. He wants to keep the peace and prefers going with the flow. So, he will agree to just about anything. He will quickly move to suit your plan. If you want someone to side with you, befriend a passive communicator. He will be your plus one for almost everything. On the other hand, passive communicators may offend others. Some people may take the noncommittal way of dealing with things as disrespectful. Different people have been striving hard to get to the goal, then the passive communicator does not make much of an effort. He bows his head low. He barely says anything. However, everything seems to flow smoothly enough, as if he was never there. So, complete passivity can still result in misunderstandings. Others who are not used to the passive communicator may resent how he does not really try to change the system. Aggressive The aggressive communicator is the polar opposite of the passive communicator. He likes to take control. He is dominant and may end up the only voice heard during discussions. An aggressive communicator is a person you will not only hear but also feel. He has a way of becoming the focal point, not necessarily because he knows a lot about the topic more than the others. It can be intimidating to talk to such a person. He has a way of intimidating and harassing other people in the group. Passive Aggressive The passive aggressive communicator may not always be loud, but it does not mean that he does not have his own bite. If he does not get his way, he will find a way to let the resentment reverberate through other forms other than oral means. He will let you feel that he does not agree through his sarcasm and body language. The main problem with the passive aggressive communicator is that he is not open. He may disagree, but he may also not openly defend his own stance. He will mutter about, highly suggesting that he is not happy. Assertive The assertive communicator is the most effective in expressing his needs. He is not aggressive and has no plans to offend anyone in the room. However, he gives his argument strength of conviction. The assertive communicator is not like the passive communicator who just goes with the flow. He has his own ideas, and he expresses them. The assertive communicator is not like an aggressive communicator who adds too much fuel to the fire. He can express his ideas calmly, though firmly. The assertive communicator is not like the passive aggressive communicator. If he disagrees, then he will say so. He will not resort to mind games. You will meet all types of communicators in your lifetime. Not all of them will be extreme cases of the kind that they are in. For example, some passive communicators may still express some of their opinions when prompted and given the reassurance that they are valued parts of the group. Similarly, some aggressive communicators may be willing to listen if they know they will be given a chance to say their piece. Finally, some passive aggressive communicators will react better in setups wherein they are working with people that they generally like. Of course, the operative word here is “some.” Situations and combinations of people can also differ. For example, an aggressive communicator can ultimately take advantage of a passive communicator, without anyone else facilitating the meetings or transactions. The best type of communication to aim for, of course, is the assertive one. So, how do you become an assertive communicator? To become an assertive communicator, you need to be able to do the following: e You need to be able to say “no” when you don’t want to do something. e Confidently declare your opinions about the matter. e Be able to hold the gaze of the other person, with less aggression and more openness. e Use active instead of passive sentences. (“I am in charge of the logistics” INSTEAD of The logistics will be done by me.) e Own your ideas. Say that it was you who thought of it if that is the case, rather than pointing at another person. Even if you are not 100% confident that your ideas will be received well, you must be able to stake your claim. Being assertive may be a little more challenging if you are not used to voicing out your opinions. Do not be afraid to do so, though. Remember that whatever you have to say, you are expressing it without hurting anyone. Takeaway This chapter shows us that different people communicate differently. Some of them are just more effective. You will know that by the fact that some people are described as excellent communicators. On the other hand, some people often get misunderstood. Of course, oral communication is just one way of expressing yourself. Add your gestures to the brew, and you have a complete means of interacting with people with the help of your personality. Will you more likely meet people with varied ways of communication? Yes, you will. You will find yourself gravitating towards some people more than others. Perhaps you are more accepting of passive aggressive people because you know where this attitude comes from. How people clique is a whole new mysterious thing. It has to do with the personalities of both the sender and the receiver. Chapter 7: Understanding People’s Motivations — Motivation need to be fully understood. They not only reveal what is going on inside a person. It also shows what makes different people tick. For some people, going to church is a religious experience. They find some light in it. For others, it is a frustrating exercise of faith in something that cannot help them at this point. Everyone has a whole history that explains each set of emotions. In this chapter, not only are we exploring emotions, but we are also exploring needs. What do people need in their life? Why do various people have varied motivations? Maslow’s Hierarchy Of Needs With Maslow’s Hierarchy Of Needs, we see levels of motivations that propel people to do things. This hierarchy is often represented by a pyramid. Self fulfillment needs Esteem needs: prestige and feeling of accomplishment Psychological needs needs: security, safety Basic needs Physiological needs: food, water, warmth, rest Physiological Needs At the base of the pyramid, you can find your physiological needs. These are the most basic of all needs. The items that you can list here are required for our survival. Some people have not risen above the bottom of the pyramid. They are motivated by hunger and instinct. They get up every morning to go to work so that they can fill their stomachs. They work hard so that they can have a place to live in. The house can be bought or rented. What matters is that they have somewhere secure to stay in, especially during the night. Even sexual needs belong to this section. For the human race to survive, there must be sexual intercourse. Some people are still consumed by this instinctual desire. Safety As people understand what they need to survive, they crave more security. They want more than that small house or that one week’s supply of food. Just like their ancestors, they start understanding the importance of gathering more supplies to last them for more extended periods. For the modern man, investing in stocks or saving money in the bank may be their solution. Those who have spared some extra cash may start building bigger houses through extensions. Safety and security do not always mean saving money or accumulating possessions. They can also be linked to your health. Surviving is one thing — but are you healthy? You have food to eat, but are you eating the right types of food? These questions start to matter when you have climbed up a notch in Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Love/Belonging People realize that seeking happiness does not rely on just tangible things. Houses can get old and wrecked. Money gets spent. Even those who have so much will find themselves lonely and alone. They start questioning their existence. Why do we even get back to earn so much? What is it for? Is it for my own survival and existence? Would I be able to share it? This is when people are starting needing more than things that they can own. They realize that a sense of belonging is better. They want to be able to go home to people who care for them and their well being. So, they start recognizing the demand to form more stable relationships, wherein they can achieve intimacy. It can be lonely to just focus on survival. Life should have more meaningful connections with people and not only with objects. You can also think of this part of the hierarchy as your social needs. Your needs to be part of your local church, community, clubs, and organizations all fall under here. This level showcases your desire to find others like you so that you can find people who can understand your goals and motivations. Esteem Needs In the previous level, you want intimacy with other people. However, relationships with others can go deeper than that. You want people to show you some respect. You want others to recognize your efforts and achievements. It cannot all be about spending time together, but that time should also be spent building each other. However, it must be clear that there are two types of esteem. Esteem that encompasses prestige and status — or the way other people perceive a person — is more prevalent among young people. Even adults who have not quite reached a certain degree of maturity may still attempt to achieve prestige. For those who have achieved enough maturity, esteem refers to finding dignity and independence. The person knows that whatever he has mastered is of value to him, whether or not someone else recognizes it. Self Actualization At the very peak of the hierarchy, you will find the desire for self actualization. This is what a person must become, according to his potential. You become what you ought to become. If you have people in your team that have a strong desire for self actualization, value them because they do their work not to please others but to be the best that they can be. Their motivations can help them reach the peak of their potential, and that can serve as an asset to them. Why Is Motivation Important Now that you have seen Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, you can conclude that somehow everyone is motivated by something. The motivations may vary, but people do things for a reason. Understanding why people do things can provide you with insight as to who they are and what they can end up doing. The more data you gather about people and their individual motivations, the more that you understand human nature. Who usually ends limited by their situation that they appear to be stuck at the base of Maslow’s pyramid? Who gets to succeed? Benefits Of Motivation Motivation enables a person to thrive and not just survive. It energizes people when they are going through tasks that are typically challenging. Motivation gives you a reason for doing something. It does not matter that you may start with some of the fundamental reasons out there. The important thing is that you are moving forward with the help of the force exerted by motivation. As you realize how rewarding it is to keep on working towards your goals, you become primed to keep on moving forward. Along the way, you will find other rewards that make completing the tasks more satisfying. Understanding how motivation works will help you motivate other people. Perhaps you are the leader of the team, a primary school teacher, or the CEO of an organization. You must know what will excite your members enough to make them work as hard as they could. Extrinsic Motivation When motivating a group of people, you must decide whether external rewards are helpful or detrimental to the group. Perhaps extrinsic motivation can work by getting people to be interested in the task and its completion. On the other hand, it can make people dependent on these little rewards. A way to provide such a motivation without it becoming materialistic or object based is through the use of praise and positive feedback. Such words can buoy the person’s spirit, helping him want to become a better person. You may even be able to lift him enough so that he can start reaching out towards self actualization. Intrinsic Motivation Sometimes, the motivation is in the task itself. You may have assigned a task that your team enjoys well. Remember how the advice goes? You have to find something that you love to do so that you don’t have to work a day in your life? So, a person who enjoys interacting with children may become a primary school teacher. Of course, there is a lot of hard work that goes with the supposed enjoyment. Still, some teachers persevere amid the low salary and sometimes constant criticism from parents because of their desire to make life better for the children. The task itself is something they find some satisfaction in. However, principals, children, and parents may help by providing some positive feedback, too. This little bit of extrinsic motivation can boost intrinsic motivation. Self Motivation You may observe that some people have a rigid armor of self determination. They get to decide that they have to do something. While assurance may come their way that they are doing more than enough, they may even aspire for perfection. It is innate in them. This type of self motivation is more potent than any other kind of motivation. People who have it in them may be fueled by their need to raise their self esteem or may already be boosted by high self esteem. They are more likely to work towards self actualization. Motivation And Emotion Motivation is closely linked to emotions. It is something that urges you to do something. In fact, the words “motivation” and “emotion” both come from the Latin root movere . What does that sound like? If you said “to move,” then you are right. Both motivation and emotion cause you to move or to do something. It propels you into action, in what seems to be almost like a psychic push. Feeling It starts with feelings. You must feel something about the task at hand. If you hate the job, then you may not be as motivated to do it. If you are thrilled about the prospect of doing the task, then motivation can quickly follow. Your opinion about something makes you more likely to feel something about it. You are either eager to perform the job or unwilling to do anything about it. Feelings refer to your cognitive interpretation of the situation, based on your past subjective experiences. At this point, you are aware of what the task presents to you. Arousal With feelings, everything stops at the mental level. You are aware of the task or goal and what it can do for you. You need some elevation for you to reach arousal. Arousal refers to the physiological reaction of your body. Instead of just wanting to do something at an intellectual level, your body is geared towards doing the task. You can feel your muscles tightening to run that race, for example. Even at the invisible point, your hormones are racing to help you activate the rest of your body. The brain has already passed on the message to the rest of you. Purpose When you are physiologically ready, there is nothing that can stop your body. You are capable. However, you need something to drive you to further do what you need to do. You must have a purpose. The ability to function should buoy you to do whatever you are set out to do. The goal that you have must be expressed into action. Expression Your facial expressions and your tone of voice all show that you are motivated. Other people should read what you have in your mind because they can see your focus and intent. These four markers of emotion can also serve as the four indicators of motivation. Motivation is not just a construct, heavily reliant on its theoretical form, but it is also tangible. It can be felt through your real physiological reactions and revealed through your facial expressions. Motivation And Personality Since this book is all about personality, talk about motivation makes you think: Do people belonging to some personality types have better motivation than others? Has it all been written in the stars, so to speak? According to personality theories, different people gain their motivations in different ways. For example, some people are more likely to be more conscientious, and others lean more towards neuroses. Experiences also play a role in the development of motivation. Some people have been exposed to more challenges that had honed them to become steadier and more reliable. Others would still end up reacting differently, taking challenges as upfronts. The cybernetic big five theory has associated some personality traits with a variety of goals. For example, extroverts will be more open to extrinsic motivation, such as rewards. They are more likely physiologically stimulated by the idea that there is a gift after a challenging task. With the channeling hypothesis in mind, some points have been hypothesized to be true: Highly neurotic people will more likely give up if exposed to negative feedback. They may easily give up on a goal just because they could not get the reaction they expected. Conscientious individuals will continue striving for their self betterment and eventual self actualization. Extroverts will pursue careers that will provide them with a lot of satisfaction, especially in the sense of holding some kind of power. Agreeable people are more likely to better team workers. They are not opposed to pursuing a goal that benefits not only them but also others in the same group. Meanwhile, the selection hypothesis also has some observations, according to their studies: Introverts who are less agreeable and less conscientious will more likely spend more time wondering. This can prevent them from achieving their goals. People who are more open to practice less prejudice seek out friendships beyond their race. Individuals who achieve happiness more easily are usually more extroverted and more agreeable. When it comes to planning, here are some of the coping styles that were observed: e Conscientious individuals do not experience as much stress as they usually plan in advance. e Agreeable people do not have problems with teamwork or planning as a group. e People with high neurotic tendencies will more likely have issues with managing and directly engaging with the sources of their stress. So, they sometimes zone us as if there is nothing to worry about. e On the opposite end, extroverted people fully engage with their stressors. e Some people who thrive on stimuli would get involved with risky actions and choices. Those who do not need to stay as stimulated will keep away from trouble. To conclude, yes, you can directly link personality to motivation. However, you should also not generalize. Among extroverts, for example, some are still more likely to be conscientious and rule abiding, while others will lean towards risk taking. Motivation For Change Motivation is almost always geared toward change. People are motivated to do or complete a task when the right type of change is promised. For example, people get up early so that they can get more work done or to reach the office on time. They are probably tired of being tardy. Perhaps by changing a bad habit, they want to show that they are ready for improvement. Going to the gym can be a challenging commitment—however, the promise of improving one’s body and health will overcome that challenge. For motivation to become part of the issue, the activity is not intrinsically motivating. Pulling ourselves away from enjoyable but unrewarding activities can be next to impossible. With motivation, nevertheless, you can make that change. How does motivation help make change happen? e The person must be willing to change. e He must believe that change can happen. e He must make the change happen through a set of challenging but rewarding actions. e Happiness Motivation Happiness can be considered a feeling, as well. Having it linked to whatever it is that you are aiming for just might give you the motivation that you need. It is easier to do something that promises happiness. People want to strive toward things that promise to aid their emotional and psychological well being. But is happiness a good motivator? According to Barbara Fredrickson’s research, positive emotions expand how we see things. So, they let us see up to the goal that we are aiming for. We are seeing our goals with brighter, clearer eyes. Moreover, we should also consider Teresa Amabile’s studies on how happy employees are more productive. So, if you are a manager, you may want to find ways to teach a joyful atmosphere at your office. You must know how to encourage every employee when they feel down. Look at him beyond just being a productive member. You should see the person behind the ID number because each employee wants to be recognized and appreciated. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) recognize how even the shortest period of positivity has a high effect on income, health, work, and other aspects of a person’s life. However, it should be clear, according to Martin Seligman, that true happiness can only be gained through self development. After all, when you move towards improving yourself, you look at motivation in a better light. As a result, you continue becoming even more motivated. This is what proactive psychology is all about. You continue asking yourself about what you could become. Rules To Understand People Rule One: It is usually conceit, not malice, that makes you feel hurt. Before you take what someone else does seriously, think about how and why you reacted. Why did you feel hurt? Is the interaction more about how you think or what the other person intends to happen? Of course, you also have to consider the fact that some people do mean malice. This is where your human analysis comes in. Did that person really want to hurt you? Rule Two: Most social behaviors are vague or not explicit. Unfortunately, you need to know people better to understand their actions. Most actions are not explicit. There will be no narration as you perform your daily tasks and other people do theirs alongside you. Sometimes, you may subscribe to what society expects and suggests the meanings are. So, you end up thinking, for example, that people pleasing, friendly people are suspicious. You question their smiles and approach as if you are in a mystery film. What you should realize is that while it may be right not to trust every smile, some people still have a real kind of light. People are more complicated than some are trying to make them look. Rule Three: Selfish altruism drives emotionless transactions. When you purchase something or whenever money is involved in a transaction, you can call it selfish altruism. You aren’t really being generous to the salesperson where you are getting your product from. You want the product for yourself, and you are willing to pay for it. You pay for the product, thus giving the company some needed revenue and the salesperson his commission. Rule Four: Most people have poor memories. There may be times when you may feel offended that someone behaves like he does not know you. Unless you are very close to the person, you should not feel terrible about this. A person who does not know you well or only met you a few times may have honestly forgotten who you are. Perhaps they know your face but not your name and do not know how quite to approach you. You may have experienced the same thing on your end at some point. Another thing that you have to be on the lookout for are those with poor eyesight. People with terrible vision may not greet you because they have not seen you. This is a common enough scenario. Rule Five: People are emotional beings. If a person does not interact with you in the way that you expect him to, it may be due to his mood or emotions that day. The scenario may have played out because of what the other person is feeling — or perhaps because of what you are feeling. Sometimes, it is hard to tell. It can be the clashing of emotions from both of you. Rule Six: People are lonely. Sometimes, we just cannot understand how lonely people can be. So, they may try to connect with you for various reasons. Some will genuinely want to become your friend while others just need any type of company. You must be able to discern who is who. In that loneliness, however, you can probably find something in common that can create a more profound and genuine bond. Rule Seven: People are self absorbed. This rule is especially true in the 21* century. Everyone has his own issues. So, you may find that people are more interested in talking about themselves, rather than connecting with you. This is not your fault. You may find yourself doing the same thing at times. Takeaway This chapter shows you that different people communicate differently. One thing does not always mean the same thing. Someone may ignore you but actually is just having a hard time that day. We are all humans. The way that we communicate is affected by how we, as humans, feel and get affected by our environment. Chapter 8: Reading People Through Body Language And Non Verbal If you can on the non verbal communication that pale inadvertently send, you may have a more accurate way of analyzing them. People often do not say what they mean. They are generally tricky to read, even in social situations. The same gesture can mean different things if done by various people. Body language cannot lie — at least not entirely. Even those who are well versed in their meanings cannot fake every little gesture. For example, someone may attempt to give you a smile that reflects in his eyes. However, he may not be able to stop a micro expression from happening. If you observe him closely, you may still be able to catch a quick frown or grimace. The Science Of Body Language Body language refers to the non verbal cues that we pass on to other people. It can be more difficult to lie with gestures. Luckily, we are given enough opportunity to see who people really are and what they really mean. After all, about 60% of communication is non verbal. A person can be saying one thing, but his body may be saying something else. You should then draw upon your past knowledge and experiences about facial expressions, for example. Even facial expressions have more minute parts that you have to investigate closely. Reading People Through Non Verbal Of The Hands And Palms How people move their hands and palms reveal some clues as to what they are feeling. The hands can show you whether a person should be trusted or not, for example. Hands that are hidden in pockets or hands placed on the head can mean the person is hiding something. However, they can also mean something else. However, depending on the context, they can mean something else. They can mean nervousness or just the appreciation of having pockets. Some women do enjoy skirts with pockets. Hands placed on the head may suggest frustration. You must check the facial expression, too. When you are speaking to a crowd or teaching, you should check where your audience’s elbows are. If someone has one elbow on his desk, supporting his head, he is intently listening. However, if two elbows are supporting the head, it may suggest that your audience is bored and must be engaged differently. Please be wary of people who find it necessary to put an object between you and them when you are supposed to be conversing. The object serves as a blocking device. They may or may not be consciously aware that they do not want to talk to you for some reason. Reading People Through Their Hand Movement Hand movement, not just their location, can also provide you clues as to what a person is thinking or feeling. Some are pretty clear and may have been intentionally given. Surely, people who give a thumbs up or thumbs down sign have chosen to do so. It can mean that they conform to the group — but it will more likely mean expressing their approval or disapproval. A clenched fist can also mean a few different things. For one, it can show anger, especially if it is at the end of a straight, rigid arm. It may also be shaking in front of another person’s face. Listen and observe clues, as well. The raising of clench fists may show a sign of solidarity. This can be mainly noted when people are also shouting what it is that they stand for. With your “okay” gesture, wherein your thumb and index finger form a circle, while the other three fingers are extended or raised, you must be careful. The same signal may not mean anything good in some European and South American countries. In fact, some Europeans see it as calling a person a nobody, while some South Americans even use it as a vulgar gesture. The same goes for the V sign. Some of you may think that it is a sign of victory for everyone, but if you turn it with your palm facing you, it means something offensive — especially if you are English or Australian. Reading People Through Their Hand Writing A person’s handwriting can also say so much. Some may not guess this right away because children are usually trained to write their letters similarly. Letters have to be written a certain way, meeting the proper lines and forming the right curves. Even though we all started getting trained with traditional penmanship, our styles show divergence from the core. For example, some people generally write large letters while others keep the symbols tight to each other. What do these preferences and styles mean? Sloppy handwriting may seem like a display of disinterest and lack of discipline. It may be the case with most, but some studies show that it may indicate high intelligence and creativity. People who are brimming with ideas seem not too fond of being dragged down by the careful forming of letters. With younger children in the classroom, however, this may indicate disciplinary issues or slow learning. Children will struggle with forming their letters if they are just getting familiarized with them. Penmanship Size Apparently, penmanship size can show whether you are introverted or extroverted. People persons tend to have large — loud! — handwriting that seems to call attention. Introverts, on the other hand, tend to write with smaller letters. Slant Even the slant of your penmanship can reveal so much about you. Some people write with no slant at all, thus showing themselves to be stable and logical. These are people who do not get ruled by their emotions. People who slant their letters to the right are more family oriented. They tend to be more emotional. Their decisions are ruled by their hearts. On the other hand, we see people who slant their letters to the left. These are people who choose themselves over others if push comes to shove. They are reserved and would rather deal with inanimate objects rather than with people. Interestingly, despite traditional writing practices, children start showing their preferred slant at a very young age. Pressure Have you seen penmanship that presses so hard on paper that they create little indentations you can feel at the back? These are people who use a lot of pressure on their pens. They usually put a lot of emotions into what they are doing. They are passionate and will follow a point from beginning to the very end. On the other hand, we have people who write lightly. The strokes feel ethereal but no less present. These are people who do not stress themselves emotionally. They can quickly leave a situation without harboring a lot of baggage afterward. Loops People who write with loops on top of letters such as “t,” “1,” and the like have big dreams. However, they also tend to be more paranoid, perhaps because they take their goals seriously. Those whose letters are retraced may have experienced having failed at their goals. However, they do have the discipline to dust themselves up. Lower Loops/Zone The loops in your letter’s lower zone (as in with “y,” “z” and the like) can say a lot more about you. Larger lower loops show a large circle of friends, while those with slimmer loops have a select group. Longer loops mean a desire to be overreaching and to travel to various places. On the other hand, those with shorter loops prefer to stay at home. cc Dotted Is The dot in your small letter “I” also shows your personality. If you like using circles instead of dots, you are playful and creative. On the other hand, a neat dot means you don’t want unnecessary details, which you likely notice very well. Spacing People who have little spacing may have poor time management, while those that use even spacing are fully aware of boundaries. Of course, you must also consider other details. For example, you can check out whether the person has any space on the sheet of paper. Perhaps he is just trying to fit the text in because there is not a lot of writing space left. Reading People Through Their Posture And Orientation Someone’s stance and posture can tell you whether a person is confident or not. The way a person straightens his back and holds your gaze should give you a clue. Posture can affect a person’s overall look because it involves the spine. It can tell you how someone is feeling, emotionally, or physically. For example, someone who is hunched may either be feeling sick or feeling unconfident. On the other hand, someone who is seated up straight is alert and attentive. At assemblies or meetings, you may want to check out who has an open or a closed posture. When you fold your arms, you are closing yourself off from what the person is saying. A person interested in what you are saying will not put anything in front of himself, including his arms, to block your message. Reading People Through Facial Language And Eyes For as long as you can remember, you know how to read basic facial expressions. You generally know when someone is happy. They have a smile, a glint in their eyes, and a spring in their step. But wait, what if you have to rely on the face alone? Well, the face will provide you clues on what happiness generally looks like. However, a fake smile will not reach the eyes. Even babies can recognize how menacing a broad smile can be when matched with blank or angry eyes. Most people, however, trust the small smile combined with slightly lifted eyebrows. Researchers have labeled this particular expression as the most trustworthy one. A frown is also pretty commonplace and usually indicates sadness or dissatisfaction. A pout may say the same thing. However, it can also be playful. You can examine the context. Facial expressions are very crucial because we often use them to judge other people. Sometimes, we may not even notice it, but each of these expressions subconsciously affects us. Facial expressions, however, can be faked. Someone can give you a wide smile with squinted eyes to don’t have to look into them further. So, you need to focus on the micro expressions. Microexpressions are subtle and fleeting. You must attentively observe a person to get a look at them. Dr. Paul Ekman popularized the term “micro expression.” This refers to expressions that only stay for a short period — a fraction of a second. Sometimes, a quick glance at somebody will help you catch that person’s micro expression. So, you will see what the person genuinely feels. For example, a person who you think is your friend has been chatting with you. The conversation suddenly turns to politics. You become more forceful with your opinions. The other person tries to keep the discussion friendly, giving you reassuring smiles that seem to say he understands where you are coming from. Then, you tum around. Realizing that you have forgotten to say something, you do an abrupt turn. During that turn, you see his facial expression change very quickly. You catch his expression hardens. He immediately goes back to smiling when he realizes that you are watching. That split second facial expression reveals more than in the minutes or even hours of conversation you have had with this person. He has not been prepared to put his social mask back on. Here are some micro expressions that you must be on the lookout for. Surprise: e Definitely raised brows, with the skin below them stretched e Eyeball whites are more pronounced e Forehead wrinkles are showing e Jaw drops e Teeth parts e No tension around the mouth (as would happen in faked surprise) 4. Fear: e Forehead wrinkles between eyebrows show up e Raised and knitted eyebrows e Tense lower eyelid raised upper eyelid e Open mouth e Tensed and stretched lips e Upper white part of the eyeballs is showing 5. Happiness e Raised cheeks e Showing of crow’s feet on the outside of eyes e Wrinkle forms from the side of the nose to the outer lips e Lip corners are drawn to the sides and up 6. Sadness e Pouting lower lip e Lip corners are drawn down e Inner corners of eyebrows are knitted, going up e Lifting of the jaw 7. Anger e Tense lower lip e Bulging or staring eyes e Vertical lines are apparent between eyebrows e Knitted and lowered eyebrows e Lips pressed together, corners going down e Jutting lower jaw e Flaring of nostrils 8. Disgust e Narrowed eyes e Raised upper lip e Exposed upper teeth e Wrinkled nose e Raised cheeks 9. Contempt e One side of the mouth is raised With the help of micro expressions, you can better understand what a person is feeling. If you want a better window to anyone’s should, then that would be someone’s eyes. The eyes may try — but they will have a more challenging time lying. The eyes can reveal so much because some parts move automatically. For example, you cannot control how your pupils dilate. In conversation, you may want to check out if the person makes or refuses eye contact. Eye contact showcases openness and trustworthiness. On the other hand, too much of it can be a threat. Meanwhile, avoiding eye contact can be a sign that the person has something to hide. Of course, it is also possible that you are dealing with a shy person. As for blinking, too much or too little can be a sign of a type of deception. Everyone blinks several times in a day. However, if a person is blinking too much, he may be uncomfortable. The discomfort can be a result of the conversation, but it can also be something physical — like something getting into the person’s eyes. On the other hand, a person who rarely blinks may be hiding something. He may try way too much to control his facial expressions and eye movements. The result is a lot more suspicious than if he has not tried anything at all. Looking deeper in, you will recognize an interested person, perhaps even sexually. The pupils usually dilate when a person feels attraction, interest, or thrill. Reading People Through Their Breathing Even the way someone breathes may let you in as to what he is feeling. Make sure, however, that you are aware of whatever health issues the person has. Perhaps he is an asthmatic. So, when his breathing becomes shallow and labored, you may be needed for assistance. Other people display labored breathing when they are furious. Yet others breathe fast when they are aroused, though this one sounds more like in the perverted territory. Heavy breathing may also suggest the person is out of shape, especially if it happens after a brief walk instead of strenuous exercise. Of course, some calm people can breathe evenly even when they are on the alert. The breathing is barely discernible. These people are barely ruffled. They are either truly calm or masters of the poker face. Reading People Through Their Haptics Haptics refers to the use of touch. This study is important because it exposes people to various textures, as well as to nonverbal cues. Touch can signify so much. Some people are a lot more touchy feely. However, most may have realized that they need to be careful about touch, as well. Touch can also be misunderstood. After all, it can be done between two completely different people. The touchy person may find it natural to reach out, but the other person may be offended. So, before touch can even be established in a relationship, you should make sure that the type of relationship has been established. Depending on the connection, various types of touch can be permitted — or not. Some touches are blatantly sexual and may only be acceptable in some situations. Not all up close touch is sexual, either. A hug can be purely platonic, exchanged among relatives and friends. Touch is not always pleasant. A touch can deliver a painful interaction: push, pull, pinch, kick, strangle, and other means of fighting. So, yes, touch can mean physical or even sexual abuse. So, it is important to be able to interpret a touch correctly so that the alarm can be sounded on time. Of course, the primary responsibility is on the person who is doing the touching, but you must know when to make arun for it, as well. The word “touch” can also be used for feeling yourself — through masturbation. This is how touch can have so many insinuations. The fact that touch is so important should not be much of a surprise because the fetus develops touch as its very first sense. When they are born, the sense of touch and warmth helps them to thrive. This is why some premature babies are given the chance to be cuddled by their parents or any other primary caregiver. Interestingly, “touch” can mean a lot more than physical contact. It can also refer to emotional effects. On the whole, you can use the sense of touch to convey or interpret emotions. You can analyze what the person is trying to say with touch. Conversely, you can trigger emotions through touch. The emotions that may arise will have been affected by the person’s past experiences. Reading People Through Their Proxemics Proxemics basically combines all that we know about body language so far. We try to interpret a person’s feelings based on their: e Movements e Positions e Gestures e Proximity to you Knowing how to read body language will help you better understand other people. At the same time, you can present the best view of yourself. Chapter 9: The Art of Thin Slicing If you have read Malcolm Gladwell’s book, “Blink,” you may have encountered the term “thin slicing.” You have probably already correctly guessed that it has something to do about reading people. You have discovered scientific ways of reading and analyzing people in the previous chapters. Moreover, you have learned that less than scientific approaches are also available and possible. This is the case with thin slicing. What Is Thin Slicing? First, we need to understand what this term means. The phrase sounds very fresh, but it has been around since 1992. It was coined by Robert Rosenthal and Nalini Ambady. People first read about “thin slicing” in a Psychological Bulleting paper. Basically, thin slicing means being able to identify patterns from thin slices of experiences. Because the patterns have risen from small snippets of knowledge, people subconsciously based their reactions on them. For example, a teacher may subconsciously react differently towards two different children. She may, for example, be more likely to say “No” to one child requesting a bathroom break compared to another child. She may not be aware that she had been gathering past encounters with both children to decide. Thin slicing does not rely on long periods with the people you are analyzing. That won’t be thin slicing, anymore. That would be dealing with people that you have known and observed. You can almost guarantee what their next step would be. According to marital expert John Gottman, for example, he can gather enough information about a couple within an hour. He uses those thin slices of experience to predict with 95% accuracy whether the couple will stay together or not. Interestingly, he says that his accuracy significantly decreases when he has had more time with the couple. Perhaps the first few minutes activates his gut feeling. He grabs the first thoughts and makes use of those to create a conclusion. When he has had more time, he probably starts to second guess himself. It is also possible that the couple put on their social masks when they realized that they are being watched. Another compelling Malcolm Gladwell example concerns an art sculpture brought to the J. Paul Getty Museum. Art experts felt there was something wrong with it. Despite this initial gut feeling, the figure proved to be genuine upon close inspection. Later on, however, the experts were proven right. Apparently, the unscientific non method of thin slicing can work better than some methodical investigations. How Thin Slicing Translate Into Day To Day Life Thin slicing may not always be described as such. Some people may refer to basing their decisions on a “gut feeling.” Even top notch businessmen may have moments wherein they rely on this unscientific type of feeling. In fact, they can be some of the best at applying the technique in real life. There is no magic involved. The method entails that you have seen the Same pattern several times. You recognize the pattern enough to analyze what should be expected. Through thin slicing, you can get rid of your biases and focus on what you are experiencing. This way, you can focus on what the client brings to the fore. Your mind’s side comments must be ignored. Reading signatures can also be part of thin slicing. You take a look at the person’s signature and make a judgment on what kind of person he is. What’s In Thin Slicing In thin slicing, you can expect: e Quick decisions e First impressions e Awareness of micro expressions and interactions e Non verbal communication e Subconscious judging e Pattern recognition So How Do I Do Thin Slicing? e Thin slicing depends on smaller details. You can perform it by looking at one element and then focusing on your first impressions on that. e Do not take too long to make a judgment. e Do not overthink it. Some people may still present a false persona in that thin slice of time that you get to observe them. However, experience with more types of people will help you build an accurate understanding of reading people within the first hour. Chapter 10: | W Insecurity makes different people behave in different ways. It is not just about being too meek and mild. Some actually showcase aggression to make up for their insecurity. Knowing whether a person is insecure helps you understand what you should do to help the other person or to alleviate the situation between the two of you. Of course, you must also consider what persona you are showing to the world. Are you also revealing instances of insecurity? Here are some indicators of insecurity:. Bullying A bully does not feel right in himself. So, he finds other people’s self esteem in squash. He may look dominant and intimidating, but a bully is really nothing more than an insecure person trying to be more secure about himself. Defensiveness An insecure person is defensive because he cannot handle criticism. Instead of listening to what can potentially help him improve, he immediately takes it as an insult and presents reasons. Selfishness Selfishness entails a person keeping things for himself as much as he can. The insecure person does not share objects that he feels he needs he will need for himself because he is not that secure in his situation. He must have all the praise, materials, and attention. Joking too much This has been said before — in a different way. Sad, insecure people may attempt to be the life of the party in powerful ways. There must always be something filling in the gaps, keeping things interesting along the way. He cannot trust being accepted by others if he does not have anything “fun” to offer. Self promotion Let us face it. Sometimes, you need to promote yourself to be recognized, especially if your field is saturated with similarly skilled people. However, there is a difference between that and talking about yourself constantly. A person who must always be validated is insecure. He is clamoring for responses, affirmations, and even praise. Cannot Endure Silence When an insecure person is left alone, his thoughts become louder. He just cannot endure the silence. So, he must chat up a storm with someone. When the other person stops talking, he starts wondering if he has somehow caused offense. To assure himself rather than to honestly communicate, he must speak. Extreme Competitiveness Being competitive is good for survival. It is also suitable for being recognized. Everyone wants to win at something. That is natural. However, competing all the time can be tiring. This is needed by an insecure person to assert his skills and to consistently prove a few things to himself. Materialistic Insecure people associate their value with material goods. They feel like they can replace a sense of accomplishment with a cashmere sweater, a Porsche, or a mansion. Their belongings should be branded, with logos that can be seen a mile away. If they don’t get to do this, it feels like something is missing. They always have something to prove to other people. The logo emblazoned clothes serve to show what they can afford. Boastful or Arrogant The insecure person is more likely to drop a social media “humblebrag.” This means that he pretends humility while actually displaying something he is very proud of — the very object of the post. An example of a possible humblebrag would be a beautiful woman posting an attractive photo of herself in a bikini. Then, she may caption it as feeling sorry for herself for gaining some weight. Of course, you must be on the lookout for the tone. Some will come out as genuinely funny jokes, more hilarious than annoying. Most humblebrags will, however, make people shake their heads. Too Authoritative When you meet an authoritative person, you know that person is in command. But what if the other person is too full of it? He may be too bossy and give harsh punishments. Moreover, he may like barking out orders as if he is a demi god. Then, you may be right in suspecting that the person is insecure. It may not seem that way. After all, this is a person who has a good position. What does he have to be insecure about? Being too bossy, however, is a sign that this person is compensating for something that he subconsciously feels he is lacking. On One End of Abuse The abuser and the abused may both display some degree of insecurity. The abuser may have gone through abuse at some point. He may be an extreme version of the authoritative person. An insecure person may display abusive characteristics in a relationship. He may seek to control his partner, paving the way for the other person to become a completely different one. Men, more than women, are more likely to be guilty of this. An insecure person, on the other hand, may allow herself to be abused. She feels as if she does not deserve anything else other than that poor treatment. This is why so many people end up not leaving abusive relationships. They do not think they have any value beyond that relationship. Women are more likely to submit to such a display of insecurity, but it can also happen to men. Too Sexual People who display blatant sexuality feel as if there is nothing else about them beyond their beauty and wiles. Sexuality can become both a commodity and a weapon, though the former is more common for insecure people. Other Signs of Insecurity The above are some of the most apparent signs a person is insecure. Others will not manifest right away. As you get to know the person, you may also observe the following about unconfident people. They do not like meeting other people. Insecure people want to deal with people that they are used to. Meeting new ones will just take them out of their comfort zone. They would have to make adjustments to suit whatever new type of conversations are coming their way. They do not believe they are good enough Sadly, insecure people do not think they are good enough. Sometimes, they will tell you this directly. Most of the time, though, you can infer it through the way they avoid big tasks and attention. When they do get assigned something important, they may express their surprise and overflowing gratitude for being trusted. They can lie to themselves You may feel something off about an insecure person. Why? They will try to pass themselves out for somebody else. They will try to act the way they feel they are expected to behave. Moreover, they may also not believe that anything good could happen to them. So, they will first deny any signs of good news that come their way. “That is impossible. I cannot be true.” “That will not likely happen to me.” They do not trust other people What can you expect from someone who does not even believe himself? He will also likely not have faith in others. He is continuously suspicious, and he may even feel paranoid about what other people are really thinking about him. It is not a very pleasant way to live. They are anxious and they complain too much Because they do not know how to trust, they are always anxious about something. Instead of actively improving their lives, they may complain about what they do have. They cannot appreciate even the best aspects of what they have. Because of this, they may not see the blessings that they are, in fact, receiving. They miss out on a lot. Takeaway Too much anxiety and low self esteem can really take away the fun in life. So, an insecure person will miss out on a lot. He may not grab an opportunity because he does not believe he is skilled enough. He may even think that the person assigning him feels sorry for him or does not really mean to appoint him the task. An insecure person will also not enjoy happy relationships. He may be abusive or become abused. The above should help you recognize insecure people. Take note, though, that they also vary from each other. Some unsure people can inspire protection. You want to help them feel better about themselves. Others can be so arrogant and combatant that you may almost hope that they will really fall on their own faces. Remember, though, that you do not know the full story of each individual. You are not given the details of their grief and suffering. Chapter 11: How to Spot a Romantic Interest L More likely, you have heard the term “mixed signals” when referring to romantic gestures. The person doing the observation may be reading it wrong, or the person being observed is knowingly or unknowingly sending the wrong idea. Getting or sending the wrong signal can cause a world of hurt and humiliation. To avoid issues regarding mixed signals, you may want to take a closer look at body language. There may be a rare occasion when the other person may just directly tell you they are interested. However, you may want to protect yourself by knowing the clues as to whether they are being sincere. How Women Signal Romantic Interest Women have their own way of signaling romantic interest. When they see a man (or woman) they are interested in, they may start primping. You will find them fixing their hair in a rather elegant way, almost like in a shampoo commercial. They will straighten their posture and push their chest slightly forward. The eye also has something to do with it, even with the shyer ones. If a woman likes you, she will try to catch your gaze. When you do look her way, she will look away. If this stops here, it can cause confusion. However, someone who is genuinely interested will give you another look. On the other hand, a woman who clarifies she is not interested will show you some of her bad habits, such as scratching herself or picking on her teeth. While these are possibly everyday actions, a romantically interested woman will not show you what she considers private and unsightly grooming habits. How Men Signal Romantic Interest Men apparently have many ways of showing if they are interested in women or other men. They may be playful and raise an eyebrow, or more serious, parting his lips when watching you. Everything about his face opens up to you: noise flared, eyes wide open, and raised brows, as if he is amazed by what he sees. If there are other people in the room, he will try ways to catch your attention. He may be louder than the rest of the people in the group. Perhaps he finds it the right time to talk philosophically, or in ways that he may think may impress you. When in a group, he will distance himself so that you will see him as an individual. He may also display some actions that imply sexual activity, or at least the anticipation of some form of it. No, he may not be aware of what he is doing. However, you will see that he may give you a crotch display — not in a lewd manner, but the way he sits will have him spreading his legs open. His posture is straight, but his body seems to be directed at you. This is what some people call sexually charged, the moment you realize that he is so interested that he even makes a show of squeezing a can of soda. As for somewhat cuter gestures that show he is interested, he may comb back or muss up his hair while watching you. He may also stroke his face a lot more. In an event, he may even become just a tad possessive, guiding you by your elbow or the small of your back. The nonverbal message is not only directed at you but also to other men in the room who may attempt to take over. Other Signs Someone Is Flirting With You When you finally meet or get introduced to the person, you may start interacting as friends, colleagues, or mere acquaintances. You may need to take notice of how they interact with other people. Some are incorrigible flirts. So, it is a habit for them. They do not really settle on one just person, but they are friendly enough to get away with it. Some people, on the other hand, might be too shy to make any kind of move. Keep your eyes peeled. They let you catch them checking you out. For some of them, they cannot keep it a secret anymore. They probably want to get to the next phase of confessing and committing to a romantic relationship — or even an entanglement. So, they do not even look away anymore when you feel their gaze on you. They let you see that they have been looking at you 10. They can be touchy feely. Now, this can be complicated. Some people are touchy feely. Notice your most extroverted colleague. They may like to touch an arm here, pat a hand there, and so on. Of course, you should also be wary about touches that cross the line. Unwanted contact cannot be accepted even if you think the other person is trying to relay a romantic interest. You must also show a clear interest in the person for such a touch to be okay. You should not feel uncomfortable and violated afterward. 11. They open up their body and face to you. If a person is interested in you, their face and body are open to you. This is the facial expression discussed earlier: eyes wide open, brows raised, mouth parted, and nose flared. Their arms are also open. On the other hand, folded arms suggest that the person is not very thrilled about what you say. They do not want to be there. 12. They direct their body to you Look at the feet of the person. If they are interested in you, then you will see that their feet are pointed towards you. They are fully engaged in the conversation, instead of their body merely directing itself towards the exit as if to escape. 13. They put their belongings near you (especially in the case of women). If a woman is interested in you, she will likely put her purse near you. A man or a woman may place their drinks near you, as well. This signifies some level of trust. They are trusting you to be near their essential possessions. There is some degree of intimacy in placing your drink near somebody else. It seems to suggest trust that you will not put anything in there, a glass that contains a liquid that you have to imbibe. 14. They keep your gaze. Someone who is romantically interested in you may keep your gaze. That person is probably contemplating whether to disclose their feelings for you. They have exposed themselves by giving you a look at the windows to their soul. 15. They give you quick glances. Others are probably shyer about expressing their feelings. So, they do so in little doses, through quick glances. They want to look at you again. Part of them does not want you to see, but part of them wants to get caught. Takeaway There are many ways a person can flirt. However, his personality may ultimately affect the strategy that he will choose. Sometimes, it is not even a matter of strategy. Genuine people who want to get to know someone else romantically may present their real selves quickly enough because they care about their feelings reciprocated without a lie involved. Chapter 12: Types Of Liars And How To Deal ith Them N we “ A w ad oe f Unfortunately, some people will lie to you. They vary when it comes to intent and malice. It is sometimes crucial for your survival and relationships to know who is lying to you or not. What Is Lying? Lying is not telling the truth or giving a false statement. However, for the second part of the definition to be an accurate one, the person declaring the information should know that he is not telling the truth. Lying occurs because the person more likely wants to protect himself from the consequences of the truth. It may also be used to present the person in a more impressive light. So, lying can help a person get away with something he could be punished or denigrated for. It can also paint a more beautiful picture of the person. Definition Of A Lie A lie is a false statement. It may also be a twisted version of the truth. Compulsive Liars Compulsive liars, as the name suggests, lie all the time. However, there are two types of compulsive liars. The first type is the narcissistic liar. He lies all the time to keep his grandiose backstory going. In his stories, he is always the hero. The second type is the habitual liar. His lies may not be as farfetched as those coming from the narcissist. However, they also do not find anything wrong with lying all the time. Both types can be very evident with their lying. They avoid eye contact, for example, and may even sweat it out. However, they make it a point to continue their stories, no matter how clearly invented they are. Pathological Liars Pathological liars lie all the time, as well. However, compared to the compulsive liars, they are more challenging to catch. They may have told the story several times that they no longer know which parts are real and which parts are fabricated. They lie not to escape punishment and not to make themselves out to be the hero of the story. Instead, they lie to defend themselves. It is highly likely that they may have encountered trauma in their past that has made them ready to protect themselves. Sociopathic Liars Sociopathic liars lie maliciously. They invent stories that they may use to manipulate others. They usually come with a compelling charm, which helps them blatantly lie without being questioned. If you become a target of such a liar, you are in danger of being constantly bombarded with false information. The sociopathic liar will not stop until he can make you see things his way. He does not care if he is destructive or if he is hurting people this way. White Liars From time to time, people are compelled to tell white lies. These are factual statements that are embedded with falsehoods. They think that by saying partial truths, they are not really causing any harm. White liars may also not be that happy with what they are doing, but lie anyway to protect someone else, for example. Others, however, may develop a careless and laissez faire attitude, thinking that it is best to keep things nice and breezy with a few lies here and there. Careless Liars Careless liars lie without caring if they get caught or not. There is an almost desperate and sloppy way about it. Such a liar knows that he is lying and that his lie may be blatant, but he just wants to say it to escape whatever at any given point in time. He does not study the details of what he is saying, thus revealing himself to others far too quickly. If you tell the person that you know about his lying, he may not be that concerned. After all, he is just throwing all sorts of statements. Occasional Liars Occasional liars lie from time to time, as the name suggests. Often, they do not mean to do it. The situation sometimes simply calls for it to save face or even their lives. These are the liars that will likely become guilty afterward and may confess their lie when whatever danger is over. How To Deal With Liars Dealing with liars is not a one size fits all kind of thing. You need to know what type of a liar you are talking to first. When you are dealing with a habitual liar, for example, you often feel that you need to end it. You should gently tell the person that you are aware of the lie. However, you need to be calm when telling him this. You should have the moral high ground by being able to logically explain the situation. Most likely, the person knows what it is about, anyway. However, some liars have been so caught up in their fabrications that they no longer recognize the truth. When dealing with someone who may have said one white lie or two, just let them know that you are aware. If the person has not caused irreparable harm with the lie, telling him what you feel about it may suffice. The person may have also told you the lie because he does not want you to get hurt. So, how does knowing who lies and what type of liar he is help? Well, it indeed does not feel right to be lied to. Imagine establishing relationships with people who have only been lying to you the whole time. How would you know if the relationship was genuine in the first place? Knowing who is lying to you will give you some great perspective. You will see who you can rely on. Identifying liars will also give you some excellent arsenal for decision making. As for knowing the types of liars, you could at least know who to forgive, who to forget, and who may need some professional help. Chapter 13: How to Spot and Read Lies In People and Detect Deception Knowing what types of liars there are may not be enough. You must be able to identify them using their words, actions, and mannerisms. People will not immediately tell you — if ever — that they are lying to you. You also cannot live a life automatically assuming everyone is lying to you. That would make for a very lonely life. Spotting lies is not that different from reading body language. You must know what you should be looking for. You must use your eyes and ears to make accurate observations about people. Understanding The Baseline Like before, you must establish and understand a person’s baseline. How does the person usually behave? Does the behavior suddenly change when you detect a lie? By knowing the baseline, you can better understand how a person behaves and why he behaves like that. You may attribute the change to a sudden shift in mood, caused by external sources. On the other hand, the transition may have been brought about by mental turmoil. That mental turmoil could have been caused by the struggle between telling the truth and lying. Hand Movement Hand movement can clue you in as to whether a person is lying or not. The hands are more likely to move too much when someone is lying. A larger percentage of liars move their hands a lot compared to a group of people telling the truth. The palm tends to be facing the person lying, as well. It means that he feels the need to hide something. Hiding a palm is the opposite of an open gesture. There must be a reason for this lack of openness. Itching And Fidgeting When a person is nervous, something happens to him physiologically. He feels all kinds of things: itches, fidgeting, feet shuffling, and rocking back and forth can all be signs that deception is taking place. You may be dealing with a not so experienced liar, however. He may not be that comfortable with lying as he may believe himself to be. Facial Expressions When talking to someone, it is best to observe their faces. Some will reveal a lot about what they are feeling or hiding quite more easily than others. Pressing the lips together to the point of hiding their lips may show that while they may not be lying, they are hiding something. You can consider hiding something a lie of omission, especially if the person is well aware that the fact is something that you must be mindful of. The eyes could be a vital clue, as well. They would shift their gaze when the conversation reaches a possibly precarious point. This movement suggests that there is so much going on in their minds. After all, they are fabricating something — an act of creative treason. Change In Complexion Some may also turn pale when they feel somehow trapped or scared that they may reveal something they don’t want to say or show. So, you may be able to catch people who easily Sweat In The T Zone For example, some people tend to profusely sweat when they are feeling the heat. They cannot hide these involuntary responses that are saying so much more about them. So, be suspicious of people who sweat a lot when it is not incredibly hot. Tone Of Voice Lying people really need to hold on to their words because they can reveal themselves. Their throat feels constricted. So, they end up with a higher pitch voice. This is where your baseline will work. You need to know how their voice generally sound. When a pitchy sound emerges for no physical reason, then you may have to be wary. Something is afoot. Defensive people raise their voices, as well. They cannot control their surging emotions and other physiological factors of lying. So, they end up raising their voices. Some may actually think that they sound more genuine when they act as if they are the victims. The Mouth Above, it has been mentioned that a lying person will press their mouths to hide their lips. This is an act of hiding the truth. But what about direct lying? What can the mouth reveal about those? Well, someone who is lying may purse his lips. It may sound like a cute gesture, but it actually hides the mouth dryness resulting from lying. A person trying to get you to take their side by lying may also look like they are smiling at you. At least his mouth is pulled up on the edges. However, the smile does not reach his eyes. The Words Themselves Of course, to really catch the lies in someone’s words, you need to focus on the words themselves. You cannot just keep on looking at their faces for the clues. Most people do not really have a lot of practice with lying. Those who do lie habitually may not be that concerned about the details in their stories. So, you not only need your eyes, but you also need your ears to make your complete observation. Some common verbal cues that can reveal dishonesty are the following: e Using too many fillers such as “um,” “uh,” and “like” can be a sign of dishonesty. A University of Michigan research has shown that dishonest people use many fillers to give them time to think about how they can get away with what they are saying. Again, this is where a baseline can help you. It is also possible that the person who is talking simply does not have the verbal prowess to speak fluently. e Most people are not natural at lying — thank goodness. So, they may slip up. While the central lie is there, the details may reveal little bits of the truth. Listen to contradictions in their statements. After all, you must bait the fish by the mouth. Isn’t that what the saying says? e Using phrases such as “honestly,” “let me tell you the truth,” and other similar statements that seem to assure the listener of the truth are actually hallmarks of lying. When someone tells the truth, he does not have to try so hard to convince his listener. e The details of the story may also be vague in some instances. They may be more animated in some parts and then more guarded in some. In these cases, you may see how lies and truth are being combined somehow. e Listen well to the rest of the story. If you have some confirmed information about it, then you can dissect the rest of the story to see which parts are lies. e A shift from one tense to the next can suggest the liar distances himself from the situation he is lying about. For example, a person can use the past tense to tell the genuine parts and then shift to the present tense for the fabricated parts. e The liar may also respond with questions. By doing this, he dodges the question and avoids — at least momentarily — lying outright. e When lying about wrongdoing, a person can start using euphemisms to lighten the feel of the act. e The focus of his story may not be balanced. You will notice that there will be many details about some parts, which he is willing to talk about. The vague and poorly detailed parts are the ones that you have to focus on. There is a lie somewhere there, hiding in words, such as “guess,” “supposed,” and other noncommittal terms. Detecting Deception To know who is lying to you, you need to be a keen observer. You must also know which details to focus on. It is indeed easier to detect deception from someone you know well. You already know what the baseline looks and sounds like. With people you have just met, you may need to discuss mundane topics, such as the weather. You may want to hear what the person sounds like when voicing opinions on religion, politics, and slightly more touchy subjects. Why do you need to do that? With lies, the person will be more careful not to reveal his feelings. What if you are talking to someone who has a tendency to flaunt himself? If you are talking to a usually self absorbed person, start to wonder when he starts steering away from being associated with anything. He stops saying “me” and “I.” A person who is lying will start washing his hands off any wrongdoing. He will start talking about other people who may or may not be involved with the issue he is lying about. Any significant change in tone, gestures, and mood should be spotted. You must also be on the lookout for head shaking. Imagine a person saying something crucial, and he is shaking his head at the same time. Does it make sense in the context? Is he shaking his head in disbelief? Listen to what he is saying. If the statement backs this theory, perhaps the person is just coming to terms with something. If, on the other hand, the person is giving you information while shaking his head, he is unwittingly saying that he is lying. A person can also inadvertently reveal that he is lying by looking bored and unenthusiastic. Again, you could get some help by having a baseline of the person’s behavior. If he is a person who tends to look bored all the time, anyway, then perhaps he is just being his usual self. However, an ordinarily emotional and excitable person quieting down with vague comments, and a poker faced is suspicious. Knowing for sure a person is lying can be challenging, especially if you don’t have access to any of the facts involved. If the person is not close to you, then you will have problems establishing the baseline. The unscientific gut feeling may work in some cases. You just know that there is something wrong with is being said to you. Investigating before jumping to conclusions may be the right thing to do, but it is possible to catch the liar through his own stories. If you feel up to confronting your suspect more subtly, then you may request the person to tell the story in reverse. You don’t have to ask him that exactly or else he may get suspicious of your methods. Chapter 14: What About Me a a N Me A So, how about you? What is your role in the matter? You are reading this book so that you can read and analyze people better. Most of the chapters have dealt with what other people can reveal about themselves. Sometimes, the facial expressions and gestures are too obvious that you immediately spot them. However, what can you actively contribute to the interaction? What Can You do to Contribute to the Interaction and Ease the Analysis Active listening and Being a Better Listener Listen. You should not just hear what the sounds are like. You have to listen carefully to what the person is saying — and not saying. Look at the person talking to show that you are listening. Engage in the conversation, by asking your own questions and contributing to the topic. When the person answers, listen as well. Some people just ask questions for the sake of asking questions. If the person is sharing something important about himself, then provide the support that he needs. By being a better listener, you: e Forge better relationships e Demonstrate respect e Accumulate more valuable information e Allow communication to successfully occur. So, how do you become a better listener? Here are some ways: Be Fully Present (Dos And Don'ts) Set your devices aside and give your time. When you need to listen, do not attempt to multitask. Distracted Listening As with the previous point, do not get distracted by other possible tasks and by devices. Listen well to understand and not just so you can make a response. Some people are even bent on making a biting retort. Clear Your Mind You may have other concerns or worries. For the time being, though, focus on the other person. Do not let other issues affect communication. No Judgments Or Agenda (Dos And Don ts) When you are not listening, be impartial. Do not do so that you can judge afterward. Listen to the details so that you will better understand the other person. It must mean something for him to be opening up. Do not listen just so you can respond in a bragging manner, making the other person feel bad. Question Your Motivation To do this, use the W.A.I.T. (Why am I talking) method? Do you really have to? Perhaps it is time to stop and listen but without any hidden agenda? Show You Are Listening Make sure the other person can clearly tell you are listening. You may nod in agreement. Do not depend on this alone. It can seem automatic and thoughtless. Do not talk until you feel the other person is ready to listen and have said his piece. When it is your turn, refer to the points that he has mentioned. Refer to those instead of starting your own story. Listen To Learn When you have the intention to learn, you will listen eagerly. You will be careful to note the most essential points. Your brain is actively finding methods to keep the information in. During a lecture, writing down the salient details can help. In a personal conversation, you can ask more questions to find out more about the fact you are intrigued by. Shake Hands To Trigger A Connection They say that a firm handshake establishes who you are in a positive light. This depends, however, on who you are establishing contact with. If the other person has a higher position, then you may have to follow his way of shaking hands. No matter what you do, however, keep the handshake vertical. Now, shaking hands is the best way to boost a connection. It is better than a nod or a fist bump, especially in a more formal situation. The contact creates a rush of oxytocin, which helps in the formation of a bond. While the handshake is at the fore of the connection, you should also create suitable eye contact. Being able to connect with the other person’s eyes directly provides you with a more confident persona. For job candidates, this just may be a way for you to be remembered amid the several handshakes. A big no no when it comes to shaking hands is to do so with wet, clammy hands. You may be nervous, but you should not announce it to the world. So, make sure that your palms are dry and at just the right temperature. Smile To Promote Good Feelings A genuine smile brightens the day — both for you and the person you are smiling at. However, something else more elaborate is going on within you. A smile creates a rush of positive neurotransmitters: oxytocin, serotonin, dopamine, and neuropeptides. They lift your mood to make the day feel a lot more joyous. Endorphins also help as a pain reliever. So, you basically give yourself a chemical mood boost naturally. A genuine smile can also create a positive effect on people around you. It can make a general sense of wellbeing. Keep Your Voice Low For An Authoritative Sound You may think that shouting all the time is the answer. However, you can actually take a tone of authority by lowering your voice. It seems that people with deep voices command more attention. In fact, you may notice that actors with deep voices are usually assigned to narrate documentaries. Morgan Freeman may come to mind. Unfortunately, we cannot just decide to have a more resonant voice. It is not something that you can just will yourself to have. You have to be born with this voice. If you need the voice for social media posting purposes, then vocal changing apps can help you out. You can also tweak your own voice to make it sound authoritative. In real life, listen to your voice more closely. How do you sound? What type of voice do you have? Is it physically possible to lower the tone to suit the style that you need? Practice humming. By humming, you can get in contact with your voice’s deeper tone. It relaxes your throat and allows you to be more flexible with how you sound. If making your voice deeper is an impossibility, then you can just work on your inflection. Being confident and adding the appropriate emotion to what you are doing should help you get your message across — and powerfully at that! Positive Body Language You can now read most of the usual nonverbal cues. If you are dealing with regular people, not spies, and master liars, then you should be able to spot what people really mean. However, you must also be able to convey the right body language. How do you make someone feel welcome? Obviously, you cannot cross your arms to talk to a person and expect him to feel secure around you. How could he? You are blocking his communication. If you want to present yourself as a trustworthy and competent leader, then you must manifest confidence. Here are some signs of a positive body language, thus representing a positive person: e Straight back/good posture e Eye contact e Focused listening e Open hands (not hidden) e Body positioned towards the listener e Micro expressions suggesting a smile or another open facial expression. Body Language During Public Speaking When you are doing public speaking, you have to take your positive body language up to another level. You will be in front of a crowd, large or small. There may be a Stage or just an open area where you can stand and address the audience. Whatever the case may be, you must be able to establish rapport and authority. So, you must keep the positive stances that you have learned. Your voice should be clear. It does not have to be too loud, but you can make use of a shifting pace and volume. A monotonous voice can be tedious. Watch the audience. Address the crowd directly. Make eye contact if possible, but look at their foreheads instead if you are too nervous. Body Language During Interviews An interview should make you establish a rapport with the other person, whether you are the interviewer or the interviewee. So, you must use all the usual communication strategies that you can use, except you will use them in a more formal setting. You begin and end an interview with a handshake. Again, your palms must be dry. You should not keep it longer than it is comfortable. If the other person keeps your hand for an extended period, use your other hand to gently tap his hand. You can use all that you learned in the previous chapters. For example, you must not fidget, or you will come across as nervous. The interviewer may suspect that you are anxious because a) you are lying, or b) you are not confident. So, it is also best to avoid crossing your legs. It may sound like a great idea at first, but you will realize it is not as soon as your legs fall asleep. When you shift to a different position to alleviate the situation, it may look like you are fidgety. Body Language For Seduction Refer to the chapter on how to spot a romantic interest. Do you suspect someone is giving you the eye, and you want to reciprocate and move things to the next level? Then, you need to know the body language for seduction. First, you must make sure you stand out. This is why you must conduct a little research. What is attractive to this other person? Are you already pleasing to him or her — but you just need to confirm things? Second, expose your best assets. Displaying of the wrists or the collarbone can be an example of this. Preening gestures can also work: mussing the hair, touching the face, and fixing clothes. Third, take action. Make sure you do something that will be noticed. You can bend down low to pick up something. It may be a rom com cliché, but it does work. Fourth, mirror the actions of the person that you desire. This is a more blatant way of saying you desire him or her. Body Language Techniques For Negotiations And Sales How you behave when you are selling a product or service will decide your success. The eye contact and handshake will again work here. You should also keep away your hands from your face. Do not make gestures that seem to suggest you are lying or hiding something. While you may have mastered the craft of talking, you should also listen. Your client or business partner will want to know that they are being heard. They will appreciate the respect and appreciation. Body Language Techniques And Tips For Teachers Whether you are teaching college age kids or primary schoolers, you must be expressive. You don’t want your learners to feel bored and worn down early in the day. Keep yourself upbeat and confident. You need high energy to pep and inspire children to learn. Always show that you believe in them, even when the going gets tough. Do not hide your hands. Showing your hands will tell them that you have nothing to hide and that you can be trusted. Body Language Mistakes To Avoid At this point in time, this part is basically a summary of what you have already learned. Some nonverbal cues will put you in a bad light. So, avoid these: e Hiding your hands (untrustworthy!) e Slouching (diffident) e Weak handshake (unmotivated, not confident) e Too much or too little eye contact (from uncomfortable to hiding something or being shy) e Fidgeting (nervous) e Pointing away your feet from the person you are talking to (not interested) e Touching your face (dishonest!) e Watching the clock (bored) Of course, the above can have a different meaning depending on the context of the situation. However, you don’t want the other person to collate all the details to come to the right conclusion. What Is My Communication Style? To better know how to make your verbal and nonverbal cues work, you must analyze your communication style. Here are the four main types: e Analytical This means that you like hard data. You enjoy analyzing them, but do not have the patience for vague terms. Your communication is dispassionate. e Intuitive This means that you look at the big picture, but do not like to be bogged down with the details. So, you want to get to the point of every conversation. e Functional This means that you like to go through the process in detail. You are good at implementing the details of a task because you love to look at it step by step. e Personal This means that you value emotional bonds. So, you connect with people on a personal level when you communicate with them. You don’t just pass on a message, but you also make sure it resonates with your listener. Reverse these learnings and they will help you in analyzing the person you want. Conclusion People are complicated beings. It is safe to say that you cannot thoroughly learn a person’s innermost thoughts on your first try. It takes continuous observation and follow through. You also need to willingly engage in communication. For you to read and analyze other people, you must also keep an open stance. Do not block the information that people are willingly and unwillingly revealing about themselves. Every day that you connect with someone, beyond your devices, you get a closer look at human nature. You investigate the intricacies of every facial line and every slight gesture. People are fascinating subjects. Do not let machines take over the beauty of communicating on a personal level. The more practice that you have, the closer you will be to dissecting the nuances of each person. When you do that, you will find yourself able to interact better for more successful relationships, careers, and a general sense of human connectivity. Body Language Speed Read People, Detect Deceit, Understand the Hidden Meaning Behind People's Gestures And Expressions. Learn To Use Body Language to Influence, Persuade And Convey The Right Message By Psychology Ed Academy & Carl Goleman Contents — Body Language Part 1 — The Origins and How to Read and Understand Body Language What is Body Language Chapter 2: Cultural Variations in Gestures and Body Language Cultural Basics are the Same Differences in Greetings Meeting Someone with a Different Culture from Yours Popular Facial Expressions and Their Meanings Hand Gestures Eye Contact Should You Touch? Bottomline Chapter 4: Hands The Importance of Hands in Body Language Non Verbal Signals Chapter 5: Handshakes A Quick History Non Verbal Signals Chapter 6: Arms The Importance of Arms in Bo Areal Arni signals Non Chapter 7: Legs and Feet Importance of Legs and Feet in Body Lan Language uilding Blocks , excitement, anger, Hi hing may mean fear and tiredness. A eee aan 7 a aig of sadness, hopelessness, or relief. Chapter 15: Posture and Body Language Different categories of body movement Posi ure sive Body_Language Language Ser Body La » Dominance and Submissiveness j: Torso and Body Language | Space and Body Lang Applicati ons ay People Ma M ay and love (attraction) C aaa The “Starter” Position The DeAnna i Handsh ike Be Mindful of Your Gestures Personal Distance Your Exit Chapter 23: Body Language for Seduction Gettin etting Their Pren Tr Mick oe a Copyright, Legal Notice and Disclaimer Copyright 2020 All rights reserved In no way it is legal to reproduce, duplicate, or transmit any part of this document in either electronic means or in printed format. Recording of this publication is strictly prohibited and any storage of this document is not allowed unless with written permission from the publisher. All rights reserved. The information provided herein is stated to be truthful and consistent, in that any liability, in terms of inattention or otherwise, by any usage or abuse of any policies, processes, or directions contained within is the solitary and utter responsibility of the recipient reader. Under no circumstances will any legal responsibility or blame be held against the publisher for any reparation, damages, or monetary loss due to the information herein, either directly or indirectly. Respective authors own all copyrights not held by the publisher. Legal Notice This book is copyright protected. This is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part of the content within this book without the consent of the author or copyright owner. Legal action will be pursued if this is breached. art 1 — The Origins and How to Read and nderstand Body Language The use of and study of body language dates back to prehistory and even pre language times. Early inhabitants didn’t know how to verbally communicate. All they did was to communicate using non verbal signals. There are signals that are universal. Everyone knows that smiling indicates happiness or satisfaction, while crying may mean having a feeling of sadness or pain. This section will discuss the origins of body language. You will learn facts and understand the whole concept. Learning more about body language, how to use it, and how to interpret it, will help you improve your relationships with others. Chapter 1: The Origins of Body Language Is body language something we learn or is it something we were born with? There is no definite answer to this question because of these two reasons: 16. Body language evolved over time in response to the social needs of humans. For instance, nobody taught you to scowl when you are angry. It just came naturally. 17. Body language is divided into several groups. There are reactions and gestures that are inborn and are universal. On the other hand, there are those that people learn through observation, and some change with age and use. For example, somebody might have told you that having proper posture conveys a positive image. Origins of Body Language Over 5 million years ago, approximately 100,000 chimps lived in equatorial Africa. The forests of Africa were starting to dwindle. The climate was hot and dry. These inhabitants were starting to have difficulty finding food and the trees have become inadequate for them. They had to learn to adapt so they could survive. Evidence about walking apes was said to have been seen about 4.4 million years ago. Having learned how to walk, these Australopithecines were able to cover a bigger area and find a large variety of food. This ability gave them an evolutionary advantage. But as they reach expanded, life became more complicated. They started to learn to work in groups to cope with the changes in their environment. They had to learn to interact with others, to know who is an ally and who is an enemy. They had to decide who should be in their group and who are to be excluded. It was mentally challenging for them. Those who had a smaller brain didn’t survive. During this time, the Homo habilis appeared. They had bigger brains. But having bigger brains meant they needed more energy. They diversified their food choices and they learned to use stone tools too. Around 2.5 million years ago, their body still had fur. Part of their socialization was checking out each other’s fur. There were about 50 members in each group. This continued until about 1.7 million years. The size of their brain increased until about 800cc. The increase in their brain size caused also an increase in their body temperature. Eventually, they lost their hair and fur. They developed sweat glands to adapt. In the absence of fur, their skin darkened because of UV radiation. This ushered in the emergence of the Homo egaster. This time saw the beginning of a social shift to male and female bonds. They still lived in groups of 50 and all communication within the group was through the use of body language. The Homo erectus emerged about 1 million years ago. They started to spread out of Africa. About 500,000 years ago, the second migration by Homo Heidelbergensis to Europe started. This led to the emergence of the Neanderthals some 400,000 years ago. It is interesting to note that the Neanderthals had bigger brains than modern day humans. They were more muscular and seemed superior to all other “humans”. Some 200,000 years ago, our own ancestors, the Homo sapiens emerged. They were anatomically modern and had a brain size of about 1350+cc. The Homo sapiens evolved to modern day humans some 50,000 years ago. This is a huge time in history as this is the major turning point with the birth of language. They faced critical issues during the process of developing a language because of reliability. Primates still used sounds to communicate. Problems arose because it was hard to determine if they could trust a signal or not. There was always a possibility of the primates faking the signal to benefit themselves. These primates didn’t adhere to the concept of morality. This led to the use of emotionally expressive signals — these are hard to fake. For humans to be able to communicate without the dangers of deception, they had to create a society around moral regulation. Language and rituals had to co evolve simultaneously. To know if someone was honest or not, society had to refer to that person’s belief and adherence to a particular ritual — this was how religion started. At this point, humans have begun using body language together with verbal signals as a way to communicate with one another. To self regulate and prevent deception, they develop religion and rituals. Humans who believed in religion were deemed more trustworthy. This was how groups were formed. Groups had to learn how to compete against each other to gain access to more resources, gain power, and reproduce and eventually expand. This was also the period when different superstitions came about. Those people who believed in the same superstitions are deemed part of the same group or belief system. Language enabled humans to increase their groups from 50 to 150. They have learned to verbally conduct social grooming. This also ushered in vocal grooming, which in modern times is called gossip. Around 50,000 years ago, a small group of humans left Africa and traveled across Asia and Europe. They spread rapidly that about 14,500 years ago, all the other Homo genus became extinct, except for the more superior Homo sapiens. What is Body Language Body language is a major aspect of modern communications and relationships. From our own facial expressions to the movements made by our body, the things that are not said can still convey loads of information. Experts say that body language may make up about 60% to 65% of all communication. Learning and understanding body language is important, but it is important that you also take into consideration other clues like context and circumstances. In most cases, you should try looking at the signals as a whole rather than focusing on just a single action. Understanding how body language works involve learning how to interpret different consistent signals to support or indicate a specific conclusion. Body language is such a powerful concept. We have learned that Body language is more than just brief descriptions. It encompasses where the body is in relation to the other bodies (this is known as “personal space”). Body language is composed of different body movements, like eye movements and facial expressions. Additionally, body language also covers everything that we communicate using our body aside from the spoken words, thus encompassing breathing, blood pressure, pulse, blushing, perspiration, etc. So, body language can be defined as the unconscious and conscious transmission and interpretation of our feelings, our moods, and attitudes, through the following: e Posture, movement, position, physical state, and relationship to other bodies or objects. e Facial expressions and even the simplest eye movement. Chapter 2: Cultural Variations in Gestures and Body Language S oaro’ < k V8 > rms my, 7 < With the many different cultures, customs, traditions, and regions come the differences in gestures and body language. You can’t expect other cultures to adopt your customs, just as you may not be willing to adopt theirs. This fact will determine how you deal with other people from a culture different from yours. Would you compromise your culture or force others to accept yours? It may be difficult to understand a foreign language, but signs (like body language and gestures) are a powerful communicator. Sometimes people may not understand what the other person is saying but when it comes to non verbal communication, an understanding may come easier. People should learn to be more sensitive, more observant, and more aware of a variety of body languages, gestures, and actions that happens every day. Respect is an important aspect of establishing a relationship with somebody that has a different culture from yours. People should be willing to learn, understand, and respect each other’s culture and traditions. Some gestures and body language are obvious, but most of the time they are subtle. “Silent” body language is indeed powerful. Whether you are working in a culturally diverse company or simply want to understand a neighbor or a new friend, understanding what people want to say by interpreting their body language can be quite a challenge. Cultural Basics are the Same A smile may have the same meaning to people anywhere around the world. People almost have the same facial expression when they are angry or annoyed, or when they are sad or afraid. Body language is generally common to a lot of people in most parts of the world. Differences in cultures are mainly about territorial space, touch frequency, eye contact, and even insult gestures. It is important to take note that the regions with the highest number of different local signals are the many Arab countries, Japan, and some parts of Asia. In this chapter, we look into the different body language meanings from all over the world. For example, you greet someone with a simple handshake, but other cultures consider a handshake as taboo and have a different way to greet others. We will learn more about this here. Differences in Greetings To clearly understand one another, it is just appropriate to find out the meaning of specific gestures among every culture. Have you tried extending your hand for a handshake and the other person doesn’t take it? If you meet a lot of foreigners, you’ve probably experienced a few embarrassing and funny culture encounters — and we’re only talking about a simple handshake here. Americans, Germans, New Zealanders, British, and Australians will usually extend a hand for a handshake upon meeting and then again another one when it’s time to bid goodbye. Many European cultures normally shake hands with each other several times daily. Some French are even known to shake hands for up to 30 minutes a day. On the other hand, Arabic and Asian cultures may continue holding your hand even after the handshake has ended. French and Germans normally give one or two firm pumps followed by a short hold. The Brits, however, give 3 to 5 pumps against American’s of 5 to 7 pumps. Imagine going to a conference with attendees from different countries and you see different kinds of handshakes. Some cultures kiss each other as a form of greeting one another. Scandinavians are okay with a simple kiss. While the French mostly prefer a double, while Arabs, Dutch, and Belgians usually kiss 3times. Brits may avoid kissing by standing back or will surprise you if you get a double European kiss. Often, Americans, New Zealanders, and Australians are still confused to this day on this form of greeting each other. Meeting Someone with a Different Culture from Yours When Italians are talking, they like keeping their hands held high. An affectionate arm touching in an Italian conversation is a way of stopping the other person (listener) from raising their hands and start talking. To interrupt an Italian who is talking, you have to grab his hands in mid air and then bring them down. Someone say that British and the Germans are intimidated when they have to talk with French and Italians because they are rarely allowed to speak. The French use their forearms and hands while talking. British and Germans normally stand at attention, while Italians use their whole arms and body. The Famous English Upper Lip The pursed lip gesture is a way to control facial expressions to show as little emotions as possible. This facial expression can communicate to others that the person in complete control. During the funeral march for Diana in 1997, Prince Charles, Harry, and William kept a stiff upper lip expression as they walk behind Diana’s coffin. Some people who do not understand this expression conclude that these men were not affected by the tragic event. King Henry VIII was also known for this upper lip expression. The pursed lip gesture is still being used today. Popular Facial Expressions and Their Meanings Many facial expressions are universal. Facial expressions are often used to show emotions: e Happiness — often done by raising and lowering the corners of the mouth while the cheeks are raised and the muscles around the eyes become tight. e Sadness — the corners of the mouth are lowered. Some even raise an inner portion of their brows. e Surprise — often, the eyebrows are arched, and the eyelids are pulled up. The mouth is open. e Fear —the brows are often arched and pulled together. The eyes are wide open, and the mouth is slightly open. e Anger — the brows are often lowered as the eyes appear to be bulging, and the lips are firmly pressed. e Disgust — the brows are lowered. The upper lip is often raised while the nose is wrinkled. Both cheeks may appear to be raised. Hand Gestures Often, people use hand gestures to prove or emphasize a point, and they can have different meanings across different cultures. For instance, an “ok” sign may be a harmless expression in the US, but in Spain, Brazil, or Greece, this means you are calling another person an a**hole, while in Turkey it means an insult to gay people. In Europe and the USA, a thumbs up sign means a job well done, but in the Middle East and in Greece, they may mean “up yours”. It is common in the United States to curl the index finger with the palm facing up when trying to ask someone to come closer. However, it is a rude gesture in Malaysia, China, the Philippines, Singapore, and East Asia. It is also impolite to use this gesture when you are talking with other people because most people believe that this gesture is used to beckon dogs in most Asian countries. The V sign is a common hand signal in New Zealand, Australia, and Great Britain. It carries an “up yours” interpretation. In World War II, Winston Churchill popularized this signal to mean victory, but his version was with his palm facing outward. The version wherein the palm is facing towards the person doing it is an obscene insult. In some parts of Europe, the V sign facing in still means “victory”. An Englishman flashing the V sign to a German to tell him “up yours” might lead the German into thinking that he’d won a prize. Still, the sign means “two” in other parts of Europe, so if there is a European bartender, his response to the Englishman or American would be two mugs of beer. Eye Contact In many western countries, making eye contact with another person means you are attentive and confident. When one looks away while talking to you, the general assumption is they are not interested and they are looking for someone else to speak to. In the Middle East, eye contact beyond a simple glance between a man and a woman is inappropriate. In Latin America, Africa, and in many parts of Asia, direct eye contact is considered to be confrontational and aggressive. These cultures observe hierarchy. Avoiding eye contact is a sign of respect for their elders and superiors. Children won’t make eye contact with an adult talking to them, the same goes for employees to their superiors (bosses). Should You Touch? The Far East and Northern Europe are considered to be “non contact cultures”. There is little to no physical contact than a short handshake with people whom they don’t know well. Even a simple accidental brushing of another person’s arm on the street would warrant an apology. On the other hand, Southern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East are considered to be “high contact cultures”. For them, physical touch is a huge part of socializing. In most Arab countries, men can hold hands and kiss each other as a form of greeting. However, men cannot do the same with a woman. In Laos and Thailand, touching anyone’s head, even children is taboo. In South Korea, the elders can touch younger people, especially when the elderly needs help in getting through a big crown. The younger ones cannot do the same for their elders. On the other hand, Italians and French love to touch one another as they talk, but the British prefer not to have physical contact unless in a sports event with a large audience. New Zealand, and Britain usually embrace. This gesture was copied by Continental and American sportsmen who kiss and embrace each other upon scoring a goal. This may continue in their dressing rooms. Bottomline If you are visiting a country or you’re meeting a foreigner for the first time, you should first learn about their culture. If you are visiting a country and you’re not sure how to behave, you may ask the locals for tips on how things are done there. Cultural misrepresentation of non verbal signs can result in embarrassing situations. It is important to learn more about the new country you are visiting. Learning more about another person and their culture would be helpful to avoid offending your host country or another person. Chapter 3: The Four Main Types of Body one ae Ye! NY AE MLN YM ea sisi, Nana ENSE he way you act and the way your body moves can provide clues about who you really are. Without the use of words, we communicate non verbally via our body language, whether we are aware of it or not. The way you move, sit, stand, and walk may be able to help you understand who you really are. Each one of us expresses our body language in one of four ways: rae light and bouncy movement soft and fluid movement precise and bold movement dynamic and determined movement. Each of these movements has its own meanings and may coincide with one of the four types of energy. Energy profiling is a profiling system that is based on movement. Everything in your natural world has a corresponding dominant energy type. The two most powerful assessment tools used to discover your energy type are your body language and your facial features. To help you further understand, this chapter teaches you what the four types of body language are. Type 1: Upward, light animated You “sashay” with a buoyant and bouncy spring in your steps. You sit and stand with many different movements, and you shift your position quite often. You may come off as restless to others because you don’t like being confined to an office desk and sitting and standing still for long periods. You are often seen sitting with your legs crisscrossed, or comfortably flat on the floor. Type 2: Fluid, flowing, soft You have a graceful walk that is soft and classy. You are likely to take longer steps while keeping your feet close to the ground. There is an obvious absence of bouncing while walking, instead, your movements are fluid and flowing naturally. You sit and you stand in the shape of an S curve or you are relaxed holding your head on the side. Type 3: Active, reactive, substantial You walk confidently and full of determination. Your steps are quick and brisk. People can hear you coming. They can even hear you sit because your movements are quite deliberate. You create different angles when you sit and stand. Your legs are often crossed, with one leg pulled up under you. Your head is usually cocked to the side, while your hands are on your waist. You may also have your body bent at the waist. Type 4: Bold, constant, still Your walk is stately and upright. Your limbs and body have little movements while you walk. You sit upright too, with a straight posture, with your feet firmly on the ground and your hands are either folded or hanging to your sides. You project a proper and formal look when you sit and stand. Runway models are the dominant Type 4 Energy. They are naturally poised, erect, upright, and structured in their movements. They maintain a perfect posture, with their back and shoulders straight up. Chapter 4: Hands L The Importance of Hands in Body Language A scientific study shows that there are more nerve connections between the hands and the brain than between any other part of your body. That being said, the gestures and positions of your hands may give powerful insights into your emotional state. Hand gestures are almost always the easiest to pick up. Your hand movements may reveal your real feelings toward another person, situation, or place, whether you are aware of these movements or not. Non verbal signals involving the hands are extensive because the hands are “expressive” as these interact with the other body parts. Hands are used quite often in emphasizing a point (consciously) or inexpressive hidden feelings and emotions (unconsciously). Hands are used for a variety of purposes, the most notable are: e Emphasis — jabbing, chopping, and pointing actions e Specific conscious signals including the American OK sign, the V for Victory sign, the thumbs up sign, as well as for rude gestures e Illustration — shaping, drawing, mimicking actions, or sizing things in the air e Greeting others and waving goodbye e And more interesting signals that you do unconsciously including fiddling with pens or touching your face or your chin, which may indicate feelings of pressure, expectation, deceit, doubt, and openness. A lot of body language experts are one in saying that the hands send more signals than any other part of the body, except probably the face. It is safe to conclude that studying the hands will yield information. There are a lot of cultural differences in terms of hand signals. For this section of the book, we focus on Western behavior. Non Verbal Signals Signal Palms up (open) Palms up, with fingers pointing upward Palms down Possible Meaning/s Honesty Truthfulness Trying to appeal a case May mean submissiveness Giving instruction to stop Being defensive May indicate strength, dominance, and authority. Details This is said to be a variation of the open palm gesture to show that no weapon is held. This is a common hand gesture that can be interpreted differently. It can also mean “I have no answer for that”. It can also mean an appeal. In some instances, this hand signal may imply confidence or trustworthiness. However, it can easily be a fake gesture to convey innocence. The outward open forearms are a more extreme version of the hand gesture. If the hands are relaxed, it may indicate being defensive. Having rigid fingers may mean more authoritative instruction. It may also indicate making a request to stop whatever one is saying. Where the lower arm may move across the body with the palm down may indicate fierce defiance or disagreement. Palms up (with up and down movements, like trying to determine the weight of something) Could mean looking for an answer. While the hand is empty, figuratively speaking, it is holding an idea or an issue, as if trying to weigh in. The signal means “weighing” the possibilities. One hand (or both hands) touching the left side of the chest as if holding the heart. May mean the person holding the heart is asking for the other person to believe them. This signal is quite easy to fake. The underlying meaning for this signal is that the person wants to be believed, it doesn’t matter if they are sincere with the gesture or not. Placing the hand on the heart can be proactive, like when a salesperson is trying to close a sale. It can also be reactive when one is claiming to be innocent. Regardless, the person making the signal typically feels there is a need to emphasize their position, as if it is life threatening, which actually is not. Index finger pointing at the other person It can be a sign of aggression, a threat, or trying to make a point. When another person points a finger at you, you might feel threatened. This hand gesture is confrontational and dictatorial. You commonly see adults do this to young people as if scolding their child. The index finger is said to be a substitute for a gun or any pointed weapon. This hand signal is often associated with aggression towards another person. A variation of the finger pointing, this time accompanied by a wink Index finger pointing in the air Wagging of the finger from side to side It may mean confirmation or acknowledgment as if saying “okay”. May indicate emphasis. It may be a warning or a refusal (another way of saying “no” The subtle wink while pointing the index finger takes on a whole new meaning. It becomes an acknowledgement, usually on a remark made by someone. The hand signal becomes a positive gesture, like telling the other person that you understood what they are trying to say. It’s like saying, “well done”. This hand gesture generally means trying to drive home a point. A person of authority or power may be trying to emphasize an important announcement or policy. Rather than making a lengthy statement of warning or refusal, a person of authority may simply wag their finger from side to side as if saying, “no, stop it,” or “do as you are told.” Wagging of the finger up and down The hand “chop” Clenched fist/s May mean admonishment or emphasis. It may mean you are trying to emphasize the last point (or word) you just made. It is a form of resistance or aggression. It may also indicate that you are determined to make a point. The hand gesture is like pressing a button on a keyboard a couple of times. It may appear as if when an elevator seems to be not working and you keep on pressing a button a number of times as if it can make a difference. The signal may mean you are trying to emphasize a point, or you are scolding another person. The hand is used to imitate a guillotine, as if you are trying to “kill” the discussion, or you are trying to end the discussion. A clenched fist may convey a variety of feelings — offensive, defensive, negative, positive. It actually depends on the context and other accompanying signals. When one clenches their fist, it may mean they are ready for “battle”. But it can also indicate a feeling of resolve. “Steepling” — the five fingertips on both hands are touching each other The steepled fingers are pointing forward Palms down with up and down movements, while fingers are spread out Cracking your knuckles Clenched interwoven fingers that are The index finger and the thumb touch at the tips It can mean expressing a feeling of thoughtfulness. It can also indicate the feeling of trying to look for connection or engagement with other people. This gesture can mean thoughtfulness or forming a barrier. It may mean losing control of a group or a situation. It may also come across as someone is asking or seeking for calmness. It’s a comforting habit. It can also indicate one is asking for attention. It can be a sign of having feelings of anxiety, frustration, disappointment, and negativity. It may mean a feeling of satisfaction as if saying “ok”. People in deep thought can be seen doing this hand gesture. Only the fingertips touch. The fingers are spread and can be straight up or curved. The hand gesture, when directed forward, may act as a defensive barrier between the thinker and the other people around them. You might catch someone doing the gesture in the middle of a rowdy meeting, usually when the participants are gathered around the table. Teachers often use this hand gesture to try to quieting their class. Men usually do this. It can be something they are used to doing. Its meaning will depend on the context. It can actually mean nothing, just some guy trying to stretch their fingers or hands. Normally, the hands are on the table or they are held across the stomach. Basically, it means “ok”. This is similar to a thumbs up gesture. It could be a superior trying to express approval to a subordinate who just submitted before the deadline or as appreciation for doing a good job. Thumbs up sign It may convey a positive feeling. It’s like agreeing with someone. It can also mean that you have approved a proposal for a project. Westerners use it to say “ok”, or “you did good.” The thumbs up sign usually has a positive connotation. The hand gesture can be done with both hands to make an emphasis. Thumbs down sign Thumbs are clenched inside the fist The hand is held horizontally, rocked side by side It is a sign of disapproval, distaste, or failure. This can be a sign of insecurity, frustration, or trying to comfort one’s self. It may indicate having feelings of indecision. It’s like someone is looking for balance in their own life. It is the opposite of the thumbs up sign which has a positive connotation. With the thumbs down sign, it can mean “not good ”. This gesture dates back to the time of the gladiator games done in ancient Roman arenas. It has a negative meaning in all aspects. This may indicate self comforting. It’s as if reassuring one’s self that they have done well. On the flip side, it can have negative feelings, like feelings of insecurity, disappointment, or frustration. This hand gesture can be a sign of trying to make a decision, but nothing seems to come into mind. Hence, it can lead to having feelings of frustration, regret, even abandonment. Rubbing hands with one another | It may mean having feelings of | This is a sign of having a positive excitement, and even relish. anticipation, expectation. It’s as if waiting for a reward or a gift. Generally, it’s a positive hand gesture. Hand/s are clamped over the mouth (hand covering the mouth) Hands touching the nose while speaking Scratching the while speaking nose Pinching nose while listening to another person speak It can mean shock. It is highly likely that the other person is lying or exaggerating things. It can mean that the speaker is lying and trying to hide it. Or it can also mean a way of exaggerating things. It can be a feeling of thoughtfulness. It can also mean suppression. This hand gesture may connote the feeling of hearing something (like the news) for the first time. It’s like discovering something out of the ordinary. It’s a positive kind of shock. Some say people do this to hide their nose that has started to redden. Experts say that this gesture might have been derived from the story of Pinocchio wherein his wooden nose will grow if Pinocchio tells a lie. Scratching the nose while speaking may be a warning sign unless the speaker only has an itchy nose. Unconsciously this is a gesture of holding or delaying an opinion. Picking nose It can be a sign of daydreaming or being inattentive. It can also mean someone is stressed out. Another meaning is that one is socially disconnected. This is quite common, but it is supposedly done in private only. It usually has a negative impact on the person witnessing it being done by another person. Pinching the bridge of their nose It may be an indication of a negative evaluation. This gesture is normally accompanied by a long single blink of the eyes. Both hands are clamped on each ear It can indicate resistance to something or someone. It may also be a form of rejection. This hand gesture may mean a reluctance to listen to what the other person is saying. It can also indicate a refusal to agree with someone. This is usually directed towards the person talking as if saying they don’t want to hear the speaker’s opinions. Tugging off the ear This may be indicative of a feeling of indecision. It can also mean self comforting. Many people would unconsciously touch their own bodies when trying to look for comfort. Ear pulling may also be a sign of being indecisive. This may also mean that the person wearing this doing this is in deep thought. Hands clasped over their head It can be an indication of experiencing a problem. Clasping the head is like forming a protective helmet against a potential danger or problem. The hand is stroking the chin Face or chin being supported by the hand/s It indicates thoughtfulness. It can be a sign of boredom or tiredness. It can also be a sign of having deep thoughts. A similar signal is stroking the beard in men. The forearm is usually in a vertical position to support the elbow resting on a table. Someone doing this could be in thinking or assessing or evaluating what actions to take. If the gesture appears to be heavier or more prolonged, it can be an indication that the person is tired or bored. The chin is resting on the thumb, while the index finger is pointing upwards against the face Fingers scratching the neck It is an indication of thinking or evaluation. It may mean having feelings of doubt and disbelief. The elbow is resting on a table. The person could be contemplating or assessing what to do next. Generally, the gesture is done one doubts what is being said and done. Hand clasping the wrist It can be a sign of frustration. The position of the hand could indicate frustration. The person may be holding themselves back. Running the hands through the hair It is an indication of flirting or vexation. It can also mean having feelings of exasperation or frustration. It is quite common for someone to run their hand through their hair to flirt with another person. It can also mean that the person is upset or frustrated about something or a situation. Hand/s resting on hip/s on each side It is an indication that the person doing it is confident and ready. It can also mean announcing their availability. The person is just showing their boss that they are ready and doesn’t need to wait for a year or two. Both hands in the pockets It can be an indication of disinterest or boredom. It can also indicate a lack of apathy. This hand gesture has a negative connotation. Removing eyeglasses The person could be signaling their intention to speak or be heard. This is true particularly for people who wear eyeglasses for reading purposes only. It’s as if they are announcing their intention to get up and talk. Similar gestures include raising a hand or taking a breath. Playing with an imaginary violin It may mean having feelings of sadness. This hand gesture is patterned to the traditional use of the violin music as background for sad or emotional scenes in moves. The thumb and fingers forming a tube and rocked from side to side or up and down. Men are usually seen doing this. V sign with inward (usually male) palm This is often taken as an offensive gesture. It may indicate a form of mockery. It may also mean dissatisfaction or an expression of inferior quality. This is often perceived as an offensive hand gesture. This is often perceived as an insulting gesture, especially if directed at a person, like male to male, as it mimics masturbation. This gesture is obviously rude. It should not be used in a respectable setting. The hand gesture is also often used as a response to something perceived as poor quality, like a performance or a project. The reference is to masturbation being a poor sex substitute with a woman, and that men who masturbate are actually not “real men”. It is seen as an aggressive and offensive gesture. It is generally referred to as “flicking the Vs”. This hand gesture is widely used, albeit used incorrectly. The gesture was patterned from the 1415 Battle of Agincourt during the Hundred Years War. It was when the tactically pivotal Welsh longbow men supposedly mocked the beaten French soldiers and the treats to cut off the bowmen’s fingers. Chapter 5: Handshakes People with firm handshakes are often perceived to be confident. In business, a firm handshake is considered a good thing. However, uncomfortably firm handshakes are believed to connote a lack of respect or awareness (like if used in cultures) where firm handshakes are not considered normal. A Quick History The tradition of handshaking started in ancient times as a gesture of trust. It is done to show that each person does not carry a weapon. It is one of the most obvious ways to connect to another person. It is a sign of friendship. From the 1800s, a handshake was also made after closing a deal or sales. Handshaking in women became common much later when changes in social attitudes were seen and equality of women was recognized. Did you know that such physical contact in women was deemed improper? During those times, women had to be subservient to men, hence female curtsey was practiced. Non Verbal Signals Possible Meaning/s Handshake with the palm down Handshake with palm down Handshake with both hands A handshake that is equal and vertical A pumping handshake A weak handshake A firm handshake Often an indication of dominance. May mean submission or accommodating. Could be seen as seeking to convey honesty and trustworthiness. It is also seen as looking for an opportunity to control. It is perceived as non threatening. It is a relaxed gesture. It can connote enthusiasm. It can mean a lot of things. It connotes outward confidence. It is usually a firm handshake where the “upper hand” seems to impose or project a dominant impression. It is usually not a strong handshake where the lower hand is submitted to the upper hand dominance. How the gesture translate will depend on other significant factors aside from the handshake. This gesture, whether it’s sincere or not, is often perceived to be uncomfortably domineering. This is a common handshake between people who are neither seeking to control or to yield. This handshake may indicate the intense energy and enthusiasm of the person who initiated the handshake towards the other person. There is a perceived attempt to transfer energy and enthusiasm, literally. The gesture is popular with evangelists and counselors. Contrary to what others believe, a weak handshake does not indicate a weak personality. People who often do this are artists, musicians, or surgeons. They are perceived to be sensitive people. People who are strong and at the same time passive can have gentler handshakes. Older people may have weak handshakes, probably because of arthritis. This is actually a misleading hand signal. A firm handshake doesn’t necessarily connote a strong A handshake with clasped hand It may indicate seeking control or paternalism. person. It is a sign of outward confidence, which could actually mask deceit, or a weak bullying personality, or it can indicate a strong person. Keep this in mind, a strong handshake doesn’t necessarily mean a positive indicator of a good personality. This hand gesture is often misinterpreted. This handshake indicates a desire to control. It can also mean a feeling of wanting to care, which is often due to arrogance. For a lot of people, this is an invasion of personal space. Chapter 6: Arms Ni y The Importance of Arms in Body Language The arms serve as our defensive barriers when they are positioned across the body. On the other hand, it can connote feelings of openness and security when the arms are in open positions, particularly when it is combined with open palms. The arms are reliable in revealing the mood or feeling of another person, especially when interpreted along with other body language signals. Just to illustrate: Crossed arms = could be defensive Crossed arms + crossed legs = could be defensive Crossed arms + crossed legs + frowning + clenched fists = definitely indicates defensiveness and hostility Body language is more than learning about the theory, it is being constantly aware of the signals other people may be giving. Non Verbal Arm Signals Possible meanings Deas Crossed arms or folded arms | It is a sign of being defensive. | As many of us know, crossed It can also mean reluctance. arms is like a protective barrier. The reasons could be diverse, ranging from severe animosity or concern to boredom, or being too tired to be attentive and interested in anything. In the workplace, it can be manifested by subordinates who are feeling threatened by people of authority. Important note: Remember that people tend to cross their arms when they are cold. It is easy to misread this arm gesture. Crossed arms while fists are | A sign of hostility. It is also an | Clenched fists are often a clenched indication of being defensive. gesture to reinforce stubbornness or aggression. It can also mean a lack of empathy. A person gripping their own | It may indicate feelings of | When you grip your arms upper arms insecurity. while folded it is an effective self hugging gesture. It is an attempt to reassure another person that everything is fine. One arm positioned across | It can be an indication of | The arms form a protective the body clasping the other | nervousness. signal. It is also a self hugging arm by the side (female) gesture. Arms held behind the body | It is a sign of authority and | You will often see this among while the hands are clasped confidence. royalties, policemen, teachers, armed forces, etc. A handbag is held in front of | It can be a sign of nervousness. | This gesture is another one of the body (usually female) those protective barrier signals. Holding some paper across | This is also a sign of | This another protective barrier the chest (usually male) nervousness. gesture, especially when the arm is positioned across the chest. Constantly adjusting | Also connotes nervousness. This is another type of watchstrap, tie, cuff, etc., protective barrier signal. with the use of the arm Part of the arm or hands are | Another gesture which | This is another form of covering the genital (usually | connotes nervousness. protective barrier gesture. male) Holding a drink (or glass) in | Sign of nervousness. This is another kind of front of the body with both protective barrier signal. hands While seated, holding a drink | A sign of nervousness and | This is often seen with one arm on one side using the hand | anxiety. resting on the table, across the from the other side body, while holding a drink (or a pen). This is another type of protective barrier sign. Touching (scratching) the | This is another gesture that | Just like the others, this is a shoulder with the use of the | connotes nervousness. gesture forming a protective arm across the body barrier. Chapter 7: Legs and Feet Importance of Legs and Feet in Body Language The signs made with the legs and feet are quite difficult to control consciously or to even fake. The leg and feet can give clues to a person’s moods and feelings. What to consider when trying to decipher the body language of the leg and feet: e Take note that men and women seat differently. This is the first consideration when you are reading leg body language. This is maybe partly because of clothing and partly because of sexual differences. Men obviously exhibit more open leg positions compared to women. e More mature women tend to adopt more modest leg positions compared to younger women. This may be brought about by differences in upbringing, social trends, and types of clothing. Take these factors into consideration when trying to read and assess body language. e You should also consider that when people have been sitting for long periods, they tend to shift leg positions. This may lead to making false assumptions in terms of the signals other people are making. e Leg signals are often accompanied by hand and arm signals. For instance, you are likely to see someone with crossed legs and crossed arms. This may come off as having feelings of disinterest, insecurity, detachment, or rejection. It is important to take note that the terms “crossed legs” or “leg crossing”, when used alone, may refer to the legs crossed at both knees. The leg position known as “Figure 4” entails the supporting leg being crossed above the knee by the lower calf of the crossing leg. This creates a figure 4 shape, that’s how it got its name. It is also known as the American leg cross since it is more popular in the United States than in the UK. Non Verbal Legs and Feet Signals Chapter 8: Eyes The Importance of the Eyes in Body Language The eyes are probably the most important aspect of the non verbal signs people send to one another. Admit it or not, we tend to assume that we can all “read” other people’s eyes. Our heightened awareness of what we actually see in other people’s eyes are incredible. Making eye contact allows us to see if the other person’s eyes are focused on us or not. It is also easier for us to see a piercing look, a blank stare, a secret glance, or the moistening of the eye just before tears come. When looking for non verbal signals through eye contact, always look at the eyelids. It is also important to consider when the other person widens their eyes or close them, or when the pupils enlarge or contract. We will learn how to decipher non verbal signs involving the eyes in the next section. Non Verbal Eye Signals Chapter 9: Facial Expressions Facial Expressions / Facial Gestures We smile when we are happy, or we like what we see. We make a frown to express our frustration, disapproval, or unhappiness. Often, facial expressions may reveal one’s true feelings about a particular person, situation, or event. While you may say that you are okay, the look on your face may mean otherwise. Universal Facial Expressions Today, there are basic facial expressions of human emotions that are recognized around the world. The use and acknowledge of these facial expressions are genetically inherited instead of being socially conditioned or learned. These basic human emotions are used, recognized, and are part of humankind’s genetic character: Raising and lowering motions of 1. Happiness mouth corners (like a smile). Lowering of the corners of the 2. Sadness mouth, sometimes with the raised inner portion of the eyebrows (like a frown). The brows are arched. Eyes are 3. Surprise wide open, jaws slightly drop. Raised brows with eyes wide open 4, Fear and mouth slightly open. The upper lip is raised while the 5. Disgust nose bridge is slightly wrinkled. Both cheeks are raised. Brows are lowered. Eyes are 6. Anger bulging while lips are pressed firmly. Take note that four of the six universal emotions are negative. When you seem to doubt the other person’s words, the expression on their face will determine if you can trust or believe what they are saying. There is a study saying that the most trustworthy facial expression is slightly raising of the eyebrows and a slight grin. Researchers agree that this facial expression connotes confidence and friendliness. Facial expressions are among the universal forms of body language. People may not be able to understand each other’s language most of the time, but they can discover each other more by paying attention to each other’s facial expressions and gestures. Charles Darwin’s Theory Charles Darwin even published a book in 1872, title The Expressions of the Emotions in Man and Animals. It initially outsold The Origin of the Species . His statements about genetically inherited facial expressions became the subject of debates for many years. During the 1960s, Paul Ekman, a psychiatrist from California and considered an expert in facial expressions, conducted and published studies with people from different cultures to explore the validity of Charles Darwin’s theory. Ekman’s work included isolated tribes people who may not have been influenced by Western media and images, and essentially made a conclusion that Darwin was indeed right. Reading Facial Expressions Emotions are an important aspect of our lives. Our face is probably the most expressive part of our body. But there will be instances when these expressions will be quite subtle, and as a result, you can miss out on the signals if you are not paying attention. There are four aspects of facial language that you need to take into consideration and pay much attention to. One of these is referred to as face reading. Basically face reading unlocks the meaning of all the geographic features of your face and the psychological traits that come with it. The three other aspects are gestures, biological responses, eye movement, and behavior. Facial Gestures One’s facial gestures can reveal loads of information about their feelings, their thoughts, and what motivates them. To be able to read facial gestures more accurately, you should be on the lookout for the following: e Movements of the lips and tongue e Variations in the smiles and frowns e Movements of the eyes e Patterns of blinking of the eyes e Squinting in the eyes e Movements of the eyebrows e The direction of the person’s gaze while listening to another person speak e The direction of a person’s looks as you converse with them e Facial muscle movements e Wrinkling of the nose and the forehead Every facial gesture and signal will be able to help you unlock another’s person’s thoughts and feelings — which they don’t usually speak of or readily show others. You’ll need to pay close attention to the different patterns of these movements as you simultaneously identify what triggers them. Paleness versus Blushing While you observe another persons’ face, you should also pay close attention to the changing colors of their skin tone, including the intensity. There could be some things that you say or do that may (even in subtle ways) affect them at a deeper emotional level. Under these scenarios, the person may not be able to express how they are feeling via their body language or facial gestures, but you will see that in the changing color of their face. Ruling out any medical condition, generally, a person’s face pales (takes a lighter color) when they are afraid or shocked with what they’ve just seen or heard. On the other hand, you’ll notice a person’s face to blush (takes on a darker color) when experience an intense feeling of anger, embarrassment, or disagreement. It is important that you put all of these things into the context of the current situation or circumstance that other person might be in, then interpret accordingly. Pupil Constriction and Dilation In addition to observing facial gestures and the changes in the color of the face of another person, you’ll also have to be aware of the changes in their eyes, particularly the pupil. Dilated (or enlarged) pupils means that the person is calm and relaxed, open to ideas and suggestions, enjoying your company, or is madly in love with you. Conversely, constricted (or small) pupils may mean that they don’t trust you, or they don’t believe what you are saying, or they don’t agree with your ideas. It is important to note that the variations in pupil size are influenced by the lighting of the environment, plus the general state of health and state of mind of that person. So, do not immediately assume anything. Chapter 10: Body Language and Spoken Language b y One’s spoken language can actually reveal more information about a person than words alone. Having said that, it’s not just from their words alone that you can see through the person’s hidden agenda or thoughts, but actually from the meaning and the emotional content behind the words they use while they are talking to you. Watch out for some of the aspects of the spoken language of another person if you want to peer into their psychological make up. Words Used Pay close attention to certain words that they use while talking to you and others. These words may reveal some of the following facets of their personality: e Hidden agendas and interests e Degrees of exaggeration e Personal biases about certain topics e Facts or fictitious ideas and opinions e Assumptions and misunderstandings. When you’ve successfully caught up on these subtle signs, you’ll be better prepared to make adjustments with your conversation strategy in accordance with the other person’s thinking processes. Emotional Undertones A person’s real intentions and motivations can be strategically hidden behind their words, but not within the words themselves. Hence, you’ll have to be more observant of the emotional undertones of their words. You can identify these emotional undertones by observing the tone of their voice, their facial expressions, and the variations in the body language that they use while they are communicating with you. You’ll also have to be aware of the bigger global picture as to how it relates to the other person’s psychological makeup. By considering and reflecting on the bigger picture, you’ll be able to easily unlock the other person’s psychological “recipe”. The Silences “Used” Most of the time, it is not so much what another person says that reveal a whole world of insights and information about them, but rather the clues are hidden in the things that they don’t say and within their silences between their words. When you ask another person a direct question, pay close attention to their answer, while simultaneously making a mental note of what they did not explicitly mention. e How do you relate this to their hidden intentions and motives? e As they speak, focus on the other person’s body language and facial gestures when they pause in between words (or phrases). This may help you see the patterns of their way of thinking and their emotional state of mind. e What are they doing to their face and body during those pauses (moments of silence)? e Based on these silences, what could be their hidden intentions and motives (if any)? d a 4 h Bs W ` = > PE Oe See, A So far, we have talked about the different physical signals that we should be aware of in our quest to unlock another person’s hidden emotions, thoughts, and motives. Each of these signs varies and dependent on some important factors that should be considered before jumping to making assumptions about their psychological makeup. Cultural Background The words we speak, our gestures, physical behavior, and our actions may significantly be influenced by our cultural background and traditions. It’s the same for other people, hence, we should learn to interpret all non verbal signals in reference to other people’s traditions and behaviors that may be associated with their individual cultural heritage. We should have to study and be aware of other people’s cultural standards and norms and adjust our interpretations accordingly. Social Setting The social setting is also a huge factor that influences a person’s gestures, physical behavior, words, and actions. A lot of us are self conscious about how we behave in public. Most of us are too self conscious about what we say and do under certain social conditions. For example, there are words and gestures that you use at a party that would be considered inappropriate at a funeral. We are quite careful with our actions. We are like chameleons who quickly change in color (behavior) depending on the social setting we may find ourselves in. In this regard, it is imperative to read into another person’s emotions, thoughts, and motives in relation to the social setting. Environment The environment also has an effect on how a person acts and behaves. Sometimes, there is a specific kind of environment that helps a person feel calm and relaxed. Likewise, some environments may cause tension, stress, and anxiety. You have to take the surroundings you are currently in when you try to find meanings in another person’s words, thoughts, emotions, and motives. Demographics Another important factor to consider when trying to interpret a person’s words, gestures, actions, and behavior is the demographics. These may include the following: e Age e Gender e Religion e Employment status e Occupation e Marital status Each of the above variables may influence how another person’s physical signals are revealed in the “real world”. You will have to include demographics as one of the factors that can influence a person’s emotions, thoughts, and actions. Physical Health Another factor to consider is one’s physical health. A person may act differently when they are feeling sick. They may say things that they don’t normally say. They may react in ways that they don’t normally do when they are in tip top shape. Facial gestures, body movements, words, etc. may change because of health issues. This is the reason why you cannot make assumptions when trying to decipher another person’s actions. Person’s External Appearance The personal appearance of another person may be able to give you a wide array of information and insight about their emotions, thoughts, and patterns of behavior. For example, someone with good grooming habits who dresses well and smells good will naturally have a different set of qualities, habits, and personality traits compared to a person who appears to be scruffy, clad in dirty clothes, and smells of body odor. However, it is also easy to become judgmental — but you should still remember not to judge a book by its cover. Still, context and circumstances are two important considerations when trying to gather information about a person. This way, you’ll be able to piece together all the bits and pieces of information you have been getting to finally unlock what the subtle signals mean. . T Fie oe =. ; =e There are four important variables that should be considered that when you uncover will help give more information about another person, these are: e Beliefs e Values e Attitude e Strengths and Weaknesses Let’s discuss them one by one: Beliefs The beliefs of a person will determine what actions to take daily and what decisions to make consistently. In addition, these beliefs will determine what they will never be caught doing — given that these activities may be going against what they believe in. A significant aspect of one’s belief process can be unlocked within the context of their religion. Every religion in the world has its own set of rules and standards that they expect their followers to abide by. When followers break these rules, there will be moral consequences that may lead to unpleasant circumstances. Your initial objective is to know if the person you are communicating with has a set of religious beliefs. Once you know that they do, you will then have to determine how committed they are to abide by their religion’s set standards. Acquiring this information allows you to better predict the other person’s behavior, emotional patterns, and thoughts, which will then help you know how to make an impact on them. However, it is important to point out that religion is only a small aspect of a person’s belief process. Aside from religion, there may be other beliefs that may pertain to love, life itself, work, play, self expression, etc. Each of these beliefs will help us determine the decisions we need to make and the actions we have to take daily. The more thorough you are in identifying another person’s beliefs, the more insight you will get into reading their personality, thus allowing you to better predict how they will act in the future. It is easy to learn about another person’s belief patterns — it by directly asking open ended questions on their thoughts and opinions about certain situations. Carefully listen to their answers while observing their physical expressions. All of these signals will give you a clear insight into their belief systems. Values Each one of us has an unconscious ranking system that we give to our emotional experiences. Certain events will let us feel certain emotions that may lead us to either pleasure or pain. We will then interpret these events and rank them according to the most pleasurable to the least pleasurable. People may associate the highest feelings of pleasure in the following ranking (1 as the most pleasurable, 5 as the least pleasurable): 1. Hard work 2. Love 3. Health 4. Adventure 5. Security In reference to this list, the person puts great importance on hard work above all else. There is a slim chance that they will be willing to sacrifice their health and relationships to have more time for work. This ranking will also help give you a clearer insight into their decision making process. Influencing their behavior will be easier when you refer to the hierarchy of their values. Attitude Someone’s attitude is the manifestation of their own personality as it is influenced by the unpredictable circumstances of their surroundings. Pay close attention to how they will react to certain events and circumstances within their environment. You will have a glimpse of their attitude and a whole lot of other mysteries that are hidden in the deepest comers of their mind. Strengths and Weaknesses Every person has their own set of perceived and actual strengths and weaknesses. The first we know through our known personal biased perspectives, while the second depends on the field of ignorance. When you are interacting with another person, yov’ll have to determine and differentiate between the perceived and actual. When you are able to do that, this will allow you to unlock a wide array of personality characteristics that will be useful in influencing their way of thinking. Someone’s strengths and weaknesses are manifested through their own words, gestures, body language, and actions. It is important to remain vigilant. Once you’ve identified them, you will have to determine how you can use the information you’ve acquired to your advantage. Chapter 13: Breathing Patterns So far, we have learned many different ways on how to read body language. There are a lot of factors to consider when interpreting a person’s body language, like facial expressions, eye movements, legs and arms positioning, their smile, etc.. But probably you wouldn’t expect that a person’s breathing patterns also have meanings in body language. Our breathing and our emotions are connected. You get a glimpse of a person’s feelings through their breathing. When emotions change, there will also be changes in breathing patterns. Try figuring out the breathing patterns of your friend, your partner, or colleague the next time you have a conversation with them. Take note, though, that the breathing patterns alone will not be able to show how a person is feeling, but it’s affected by the circumstance that a person is currently in. Your breathing is likely to pick up when you are under a lot of stress, and this stress can either be turned into positive or negative. Slower breaths typically mean one is in a state of calmness. Let’s take a look at the different breathing patterns that you may have also experienced one way or another. Deep breaths may signify fear, excitement, anger, and love (attraction) In terms of interpreting another person’s body language, deep breathing is probably one of the most noticeable breathing patterns. When someone suddenly holds their breath when tangled in a difficult situation, they may be sending a message of fear. It could also mean anger when one takes a deep breath followed by shouting (or even screaming). Deep breathing also has other meanings, like a person is shocked, excited, or surprised. Deep breathing may also convey a positive feeling, like when one sees the object of their affection, you might notice some heavy breathing patterns. For instance, when a guy wants to impress a girl she likes, taking a deep breath would help make them appear to have a broader shoulder and a smaller stomach. Heavy and rapid breathing may mean fear and tiredness. If you see a person running because a dog was chasing them, yov’ll notice that they’ll be taking deep, rapid breaths. The same goes for someone you see chasing after a bus they just missed. This is because the heart beats a little faster, and as a result, the lungs would need more oxygen — that is very much referred to as “catching their breath”. A sigh could be a sign of sadness, hopelessness, or relief. A sigh is a long, deep breath with a faint sound. You might hear a person sigh because they felt relieved after a struggle — they are likely thankful that their struggle is over and that they have survived it. Sighing may also be an expression of hopelessness and sadness. Like when a woman is waiting for her date who failed to show up. It’s also an indication of disappointment and frustration. So, next time you are having a conversation with another person, look for signs in their breathing patterns, you’ll learn more about their thoughts, emotions, and motives through them. C hapter 14: Fidgeting oY eT ae + A) We cannot reiterate it enough that body language is crucial in communication. Your actuations may warp the whole meaning of what you are trying to convey. Having said that, our “bad” body language habits are quite hard to break. When you’ve been accustomed to slouching, folding your arms, or averting your eyes, you’d barely notice what you are doing. These bad habits become like “second skin”. For this chapter, we will discuss one of the most difficult body language habits to ditch — fidgeting. What is fidgeting or fidget? Other terms that can be used include squirming, dancing in the chair, and back and forth shifting. To fidget is to make small movements with your body, particularly with the hands and feet. Fidgeting means repetitive behaviors like swinging of the feet while in crossed leg position, tapping of the toes, shifting positions, or the drumming of the fingers. In other words, fidgeting is often associated with not paying attention. It connotes restlessness and discomfort. For instance, you have been sitting on your chair for a long time listening to a lecture, you’|l absentmindedly find yourself tapping your pen or playing with it. Fidgeting temporarily distracts you from whatever activity you are currently doing. Scientists and researchers often refer to fidgeting as a “mental break” because it becomes the body’s way of trying to stay focused on an activity. However, other studies suggest that fidgeting could mean a wandering mind. It is often seen as a negative signal. However, when the body starts fidgeting, it also starts to release energy that will help you calm down and soothe the nerves when you are under a lot of stress. Fidgeting is actually the body’s way of saying that it needs to do some exercise. Use this information to turn the negative connotation of fidgeting to positive. In adults, fidgeting is also seen as a sign that a person has a lot of excess energy, or it is also deemed as having hyperactivity disorder. Fidgeting can also be a sign of boredom and nervousness. When you are stressed, the body releases adrenaline, the stress hormone. As a result, the body will be given a signal by the brain to move so as to burn the excess energy off. Involuntarily, the movement has to be made to solve the issue of having excess energy, and the stress hormone adrenaline, plus cortisol (another stress related hormone) are instrumental for this “action”. Thus, it may be deemed normal to fidget when under a lot of stress. This explains why you’ll notice people seem to be squirming in their chairs because of stress or pressure. Fidgeting is also seen as a sign of boredom. The body receives internal cues to move, get up, and leave. Think of the body as a car revving its engine. Therefore, fidgeting serves as a substitute for walking or running in situations that neither can be done or the situation merits otherwise. Fidgeting is also considered as an expression signaling that the body needs exercise and movement so as to burn off energy. This is quite common in children who are not used to sitting still for long periods. It is commonly associated with children diagnosed with having hyperactivity disorder. However, it has been recently reported as just an overstatement. In recent years, children are being allowed to release excess energy in classroom settings. Teachers usually have activities for children, so they are not left sitting for most parts of their day in schools. This move has been proven to be quite effective. Fidgeting may include touching the face and other parts of the body, rocking back and forth, smoothing clothing, adjusting sitting position, shifting back and forth, standing up then sitting down again, checking pockets, pacing, etc. In terms of body language, fidgeting may give you a lot of clues as to how the other person is actually feeling, without revealing anything to you verbally. These may include arousal, energy displacement, boredom, escape movements, stressful body language, and nervous body language. When trying to read through another person when they are constantly fidgeting, you’ll have to make sure that you are within the premise of our assumption that the one who fidgets is usually bored, restless, or stressed. Chapter 15: Posture and Body Language Body language is also referred to as body movements or kinesics. Body language encompasses gestures, head and hand movements, whole body movements, and posture. Body movements may be used to put emphasis on your ideas, suggestions, or opinions. It also provides other people to take a peek at your attitudes and emotions. However, there is a high likelihood that your body movements do not align with what you are saying. A person who is adept with unlocking clues on the subtle discrepancies in behavior will be able to use them as a reference as to how to conclude what another person is thinking and feeling. Different categories of body movement e Emblems : Gestures may have the same meaning as the emblems. Examples of these are the “thumbs up” sign, the peace sign, or the sign when hitch hiking. However, not all emblems are recognized internally. There will be various interpretations of their emblems based on a community’s culture and tradition. e Illustrators: Illustrators are the gestures that come with the words people say. Illustrators create a verbal message. Their gestures include nodding the head when agreeing to something or the circular hand movement when trying to say, “over and over again”. e Regulators: Regulators are the gestures that provide feedback while conversing. Examples include short sounds like “uh uh”, or “mmm mmm” or head nods, these could be expressions of boredom. These regulators will allow the other person to adapt his speech to reflect on the level of interest of his audience. Without getting feedback, it would be hard to maintain a conversation. We go back again to what we keep on saying throughout the other chapters context. It is always important to use your better judgment. e Adaptors: The adaptors are non verbal behaviors. Examples include adjusting the glasses, scratching the head, or biting fingernails. Biting their fingernails may connote a psychological issue. A person would be having feelings of doubt and nervousness. Posture Now, let us focus on our posture — the way we stand and hold ourselves. For this section, we will discuss posture and body language from the general attitude it represents. Posture is a matter of habit, it is imperative that you pay attention and make the necessary adjustments. Bad posture leads to bad health and negative image problems. On the other hand, good habits lead to better health and good first impressions. To illustrate, someone who has hunched shoulders is seen as lazy, indecisive, and passive, compared to someone who holds himself straight with straight shoulders. Posture by itself is not as expressive as hand gestures or facial expressions, but it can still be used as a basis when trying to decipher a person’s body language. Straight Posture For a lot of people, keeping your back straight and shoulders arched is quite hard. But only a few people realize its benefits. Having a straight and relaxed posture is good for your health. For one, it helps in the blood circulation thus ensuring that your body is in functioning in optimal condition. Body language affects how you feel, hence, sitting or standing straight up is a good way to improve your mood. It also provides you with the energy you need. When you are interacting with other people and you have a straight posture, you are giving off an impression of a confident person, someone who knows how you handle himself well. You are getting a positive impression from other people. On the other hand, having poor posture has a negative effect on your self esteem. It also reflects a poor self image. A slouch may be a temporary state of feeling down or it can be a result of having bad habits over the years. People look at others who have poor posture as lazy or have no confidence. However, there is an important consideration when it comes to posture and body language — the elderly. Hunched back and slumped shoulders may very well be an indication of old age. Though this is because of old age, it could have been prevented or improved had the elderly practiced proper posture. Briefly, we will give you some tips on how to achieve good posture. So what does it mean to have the “correct posture”? Consider these: e The head should be held high in a neutral position. Your ears should be in line with the shoulder line. e Your shoulders should be resting down. e Your chest should be held open (but it shouldn’t be puffed up). When you breathe, it should come from the abdomen. e Both your feet should be firmly on the ground, and the full weight of your body should be evenly distributed between both your heels. e Make sure not to overextend the curve of your back. It should also not be tensed that you can barely move. Remember you’re not a wooden log so you don’t have to be too stiff. e Maintain a slight tension in your stomach and buttocks muscles to keep your composure. It could be difficult at first, but if you get the hang of it, it will become a habit — a good habit indeed. Takeaway If you practice good posture, you’ll leave a positive impression on other people. When trying to decode another person’s thoughts and feelings using posture, keep in mind that not all who slouch are lazy or have a bad posture, consider if they are in their golden years. Again, context and other factors influence the meaning of posture in relation to body language. Defensive Body Language A defensive stance may mean hostile attitude or insecurity. Hiding and Shielding Our body language evolves as we grow as it adapts to our social environment. We learn to express the same attitudes and emotions like we did as children, but this time, only with more subtlety and with self control. This is true specifically in societies where it is inappropriate to publicly express one’s feelings. The best example is defensive body language. When a little child feels insecure, you’ll often see them hiding behind their mother or behind a piece of furniture. This is their way of seeking protection and refuge. As the child grows, obviously, they won’t be able to hide behind their mother or hide behind a curtain because doing so may reveal their lack of confidence. This becomes a defensive stance by looking for other artificial barriers to help them feel safe and secured. Most Common Defensive Gesture Keep this in mind: the most common gesture for self comfort is folding your arms. It’s like hugging yourself so you’ ll feel protected. The chest is a vulnerable part of the body because it contains vital organs: the heart and lungs. This posture is aimed to protect yourself. When people fold arms, they feel that they take back the control and they feel protected, not because you are afraid of being physically assaulted. When you are reading the many aspects of the body language of another person, look for these varieties of folding the arms: e Folded arms with clenched fists e Arms are tightly or loosely folded e Arms are hidden or revealed e Both hands are clutching the arms e Hands are positioned under the armpits The above gestures connote defensiveness, but each of these stances is on a different scale or attitude. The more tense the gesture appears to be, the more severe the reaction. However, it can also mean that the person is cold. If both arms are held loosely, it can connote having a close minded attitude. It can also mean outright rejection. The person is sending a message that they are not impressed at all. When the arms are folded and the fists are clenched, it may connote a more hostile or aggressive stance than the commonly folded arms. It could be seen aS a warning prior to a physical assault. You would often see this kind of stance from security personnel. Are arms folding the same as the crossed leg stance? Another form of defensive body language may appear with the use of the legs. Legs crossed is a subtle way of hiding one’s insecurity. It is a less obvious position because most people are not focused on lower body gestures. Another defensive stance is crossing the ankles. Experts say it is equivalent to biting the lips, as it means that the person is holding something back or they are trying to hide something, a feeling, or an emotion. While crossing the legs is a result of old habits, it is not actually considered as a defensive attitude. For instance, early on, girls are taught to keep their legs together, because it is considered a more lady like position. Having mentioned that, if you see a girl sitting with her legs far apart, it is a display of a dominant personality or a display of a provocative demeanor. It’s like she is telling the people around her that she doesn’t care about what other people think. Fig Leaf Position A quite familiar posture is called the fig leaf position — both hands are crossed over the genital area. Experts say this position is a self comfort gesture. It is a sign of vulnerability since it appears that the person is protecting the most sensitive part of their body. A person in this position may be feeling uneasy or something or someone is making them uncomfortable. It may also be an indication that the person is an introvert. It can also mean that person has an innocent personality, someone who is not comfortable displaying their sexuality in public. This position is actually the opposite gesture that seems to be emphasizing the crotch area — like where the thumbs are protruding out of the pocket or belt towards the crotch as if showing “who’s the man”. Subtle Means of Making a Defensive Body Language For those who are more conscious of their body language, like public figures, celebrities, or politicians, they are aware that folding their arms in front of them may have a negative connotation. It may mean that they feel insecure or being defensive, which is not a good image to project. They cannot be caught making that stance in public. To protect the image they are trying to project, these people try to avoid obvious gestures that may be uncomfortable or inappropriate. However, people cannot fully control their own body language. This is true especially when one is under a lot of stress. For people who have a public image to protect, they would resort to more subtle ways of expressing their insecurity, like the following: When a public figure is under immense pressure or stressed out, they resort to more subtle ways of defensive body language: e “Playing” with their wristwatch or any accessories on their hand or arm. This is a self touch gesture. It is a gesture that shields the body and it provides an excuse for the person to do so. You will often see this stance when a person is put in a tight spot, like when they need to deliver a speech or make a presentation. e Holding a few items in front of the body, like a book, a folder, an umbrella, a bag, or a podium, among others. The item acts as the person’s protective shield. e Holding a drinking glass with both hands. Normally, we don’t hold our glass with our two hands. For some people, using both hands to hold their glass is their way of hiding inside their comfort zone. People can be defensive. Some people who use the posture of defensive language feel more comfortable doing it. They cannot admit that they doing the defensive stance because they feel threatened, and for most of them, this is nothing personal. It is important to take note that our body language is a reflection of our inner mood subconsciously, and not because it is our intention to display it. So, if we feel comfortable in folding our arms, something could be bothering us and we subconsciously “protect ourselves from it”. This is the reason why we feel relaxed and comfortable when we are in this position. It is important to point out that the interpretation of one’s body language is made by the receiver. Folding your arms may be comfortable with you but other people think otherwise. It’s the same when you are the receiver of such a gesture. What is the difference between simply being cold and being defensive? Most of us would normally fold our arms and legs in both cases. However, it’s actually easy to distinguish them — it’s in the amount of tension and discomfort displayed. e Both hands are stuck under the armpits, and not under the elbows. e Legs are straight and tensed, and not easily rested. e The head will be bowed down, hiding the neck. e Other signals, like chattering teeth, stomping feet, and shivering. Blocking Thoughts Experts agree that crossed body language means the person is being unreceptive to the other person. There were studies made proving that defensive body language creates a negative reception towards the speaker. It also blocks off information. The longer one stays in this position, the more negative and unreceptive one would become towards the speaker. Keep in mind that our body language not only reflects but also affects our mindset. Even if you are genuinely interested in what the speaker has to say, your defensive posture may lead to adopting a closed minded and isolated position. An open body is a prelude for an open mind. It actually works both ways. So, if you are the speaker and you want the other person to listen to you, change your stance, and adapt the open body position rather than the crossed body position. Remember that your goal is to have them listen to you and you’ll never achieve that if you have a defensive stance. You can also release the tension by letting your listeners give their doubts and objections. Ask if they have questions or concerns. Make them feel that you care about their thoughts. Defensive Body Language is Not Always Bad It is all not that bad. Defensive body language is a reflection of your feelings and it’s just natural that you want to express it. The next time you’re with a group of strangers, it’s natural not to feel secure. It’s normal that you wouldn’t want to let your guard down until you know them. Another point of consideration, people tend to “mirror” the body language of others and we all do it intuitively. Don’t be surprised to see a group of people conversing with each other with the same stance — arms folded. It can be a sign of mutual display of unity and not necessarily a brewing conflict. However, if your goal is to come off as more approachable, then you’ll have to ditch the defensive body language and adopt open body language. Positive Body Language After going over the negative body language postures, it’s now time to talk about the positives. How do we tell if it is positive body language? When we say positive body language, it means open and approachable. But it doesn’t mean that you’|l always have to use, rather, it should be a cluster of signals that exude an open minded and friendly attitude. How do you do it then? Let’s explore the possibilities. Avoid Creating Barriers To establish trust with other people, you’ll need to show them that you do not pose a threat to them, and you are not afraid of them either. Keep in mind that a defensive stance affects your attitude, hence, if you are constantly on the defensive, it will be hard for other people to approach you or for you to accept them. So, you need an open body language and you have to avoid creating barriers. The main purpose of removing your defenses is to create a warm, welcoming, and confident atmosphere. This way you are telling them a message — that you do not fear them, and they shouldn’t fear you. This is a process. Complete strangers won’t immediately become your biggest fans just because you decided to “open up”. But if you play it right, they might reconsider, or at least you’ll be able to understand their general attitude and perception towards you. Here are the steps to “open up”: It is understandable that complete strangers will be comfortable at assuming the crossed arms and legs position at the start. It is also expected that they will also be keeping a considerable distance from each other. Some people would hold something in front of them, like a bag or a file folder. Some will even close up their coat. As they warm up with one another, the legs barrier begin to disappear, and they will be a little “closer”. Then, they will start to loosen up a bit more as they continue with their interaction. Eventually, they will reveal their palms. Then comes the arms uncrossing (for both of them). This means they are warming up further. Soon enough, they will be leaning and pointing with the body towards the other person. It would be wise if you take the initiative and assume the next position because this might make them open up to you more quickly. We tend to copy the body language of the people around us, albeit unconsciously. So, it is highly likely that when you begin assuming welcoming positions, they might “mirror” your actions. How fast or how slow the process is will depend on the premise (if it’s a fun party or a random meeting of two strangers on the street), the character (whether introvert or extrovert), and the person’s culture. When you have nothing to hide: The first step in projecting a more positive body language is to avoid creating barriers. This will help eliminate the challenges in order to build a good long term relationship. But you have to keep this in mind, you cannot use this in your day to day life with everyone. Your superior might assume that you are planning to ask him for a longer leave or a friend might think that something’s up, hence the changes in you. You may use similar gestures so that you’ll come off as an honest, positive, and open person. You have to be conscious that your palms are exposed because this means your willingness and sincerity, that they can trust you, and that you have nothing to hide. Other signs may also project cooperation and honesty include: e Your head should be in a neutral position. Be mindful that you do not bow to them but never look down on them either. e Your clothes and body are open. Do not hold objects or items in front of you. e Smile Leaning Forward The most distinct way to non verbally say that you like a person, and you’d like to know him/her more is to lean forward. Does this mean you have to lean and nod more? Definitely not! Overdoing it may lead to two problems, which are: e Overextending might be interpreted differently, like invading the other person’s personal space. This can make the other person feel uncomfortable, even if it wasn’t your intention in the first place. This is also the reason why some people would lean forward when they are trying to intimidate their opponent, only this is deemed more aggressive and creates more tension. e When you smile, nod, and lean with all the people you encounter all the time, you will come off as someone who is eager to please. It has a negative effect since people will look at you as having a lower status in society. Don’t Overdo Being “Positive” Positive body language doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the “best” form of communication. People are social creatures. We have different emotions and attitudes, trying to apply only one all the time will give others the impression that you are fake, insincere, or one dimensional. Consider this, an over expressive positive and attentive attitude will actually hurt your status and reputation. If people see you doing it every single time that they see you, they will take it for granted and easily dismiss it. You don’t have to please everybody. You should show focus and attention, yes, but only to those who deserve it. Body Language: Dominance and Submissiveness For this section, let’s discuss how we express a dominant or a submissive attitude via our body language. When we say dominance or submissiveness, we are talking about the amount of influence over other people. e How strongly do you feel compared to the other members of the community or the group? e How comfortable are you to take command and be responsible for making decisions for the group? e Are you the alpha male (female)? Or are you simply a follower? e Are you at the bottom of the pack? All these signs are quite visible in the way you talk, act, and move. The hierarchy seems to be part of the society that is used to maintain order. Every time there is a new group setting, there is always a need to establish who are the ones who will lead and who will be the followers. There is no need to cast votes. No need to ask questions. It appears that everyone is simply able to find their place. How does it happen? Here are two factors that explain it: e Context and Position ; they often dictate who should be the dominant person in a specific scenario. To illustrate: a ranking general may be the most dominant figure when it comes to the battlefield, but back home he could be letting his wife take the lead in making decisions about their family. People automatically submit to the people whom, they believe, know what they are doing. e Non verbal communication. We may speak the words, but our actions also have meanings. This could be others’ perception of us. For instance, if a young trainee acts dominant when talking to their CEO, that trainee will be considered as an insolent person, this is because he is challenging the authority of the commander. Remember that we cannot always have control over the context, but we still continue on and choose how we will act. Body language is probably the best way to deliver that message you want to share, without the need to resort to shouting. The Dominant Body Language Assuming the dominant posture could be due to habit — if you are used to being in charge over others. It could also be our assumption that we are at the top of the food chain. Alternatively, we recognize people of higher authority than us and those who wiser than us, and we submit to them. How to know who is the potential leader even from a distance? Here’s how: e Focus on group dynamics. Identify who leans towards whom. Who makes eye contact with whom? Often, most of the members are likely to lean or turn their body towards the person they perceive as the leader, this could be to seek that person’s attention and approval. e The behavior of the person you think can be or is a leader. Someone dominant is comfortable in his position — in control and makes important decisions. He doesn’t have to be aggressive or loud, nor does he need to be the center of attention. You’ll see that from his body language, the tone of his voice, and the way he deals and interacts with other people. Generally speaking, a dominant person will take advantage of body language to be able to take over a large space and to appear bigger and taller. Everything should depend on how you use body language to appear dominant. Here are a few examples: e Standing tall with your chest open and your head held high. e Taking space by spreading your arms as your legs are spread wide apart. e Revealing your vulnerable areas. As if saying, “I dare you to hit me,” it brings fearlessness. e Leaning back with your hands behind your back, which is often referred to as the “know it all” posture. e Hands on the hips . It’s imitating a fluffed rooster that is trying to appear bigger and intimidating. e Hands are tucked in the pockets or belt while the thumbs are pointing towards the crotch area. It’s a stance that seems to be showing off who has the “biggest tool” in the group. The males are often seen assuming this stance, but here are assertive females that you may see copying this dominant posture. e Hand in hand behind the back. It’s a common stance by a policeman who is patrolling the streets. It is a self assured posture. It is all about exposing your vulnerable parts and getting a lot of personal space. You'll see some women taking similar postures, but they appear to be subtler, more feminine. Like keeping just one hand on the hips, lifting her head high, and walking fast with long strides. Submissive Body Language The submissive body language takes on a more defensive, indecisive, or reclusive attitude. A submissive person opts to relinquish their power to other people and avoid being in control. They would try to appear as small as possible. Some people become submissive for a lot of reasons, including, the fear of being in command, low self esteem, insecurity, idolizing the other person, or unmotivated. Here are examples of submissive posture: e The Head is slightly bowed e The body will try to appear to be smaller and less intimidating e Chest caved in e Eyes are wide open and look innocent e Hunched shoulders appear to be passive and sad e Crossed and defensive stance. Chapter 16: Torso and Body Language The word “torso” came from the Latin word, thyrsus, which means “stalk”. The torso is the trunk of the body. This is the area where your vital organs are located. Being flexible, the torso can turn, twist, and bend back and forth. This is the area of the body that people have less conscious control over. The lack of conscious control of the torso makes it a good indicator of body language signs. So, if a person turns their torso away from you, it could be an unconscious way of signifying that they want to leave. Turn the torso away may also be an indication of feeling threatened and it is their way of protecting their vital organs. It can also be a sign that the other person doesn’t like you or that they don’t want to interact with you. In a business scenario, people could be turning their bodies away from you for many different reasons. It could be a feeling of insecurity. It may also mean they are being defensive. It can also mean they are in a hurry to get away from you, not because they feel threatened, but rather because they are hiding something. Whatever their reasons are, turning away the torso is a sign that they are feeling uncomfortable or they simply don’t want to engage. Chapter 17: Personal Space and Body Language ( v i . All of us have an invisible, protective bubble surrounding the body. It is like a force field that is immediately activated whenever we feel threatened. It is like a portable air bubble that we carry anywhere we go. Its size depends on the population in a particular place. Personal space is partially culturally determined. In some cultures, like in Japan, their residents are used to crowing and some would prefer the “open spaces, and they would feel more comfortable if you keep your distance. Zone Distances e Intimate Zone is between 6 and 18 inches (15cm to 45cm). Only our parents, partners, children, relatives, close friends, and even pets are to be this close to us. e Personal Zone is between 18 and 48 inches (45cm to 1.2m). This is the distance that we try to protect when we are around a lot of people, like social functions, parties, or an office full of people. e Social Zone is between 4 and 12 feet (or 1.22 3.6m). This is a safe distance when there are other people around you. e Public Zone is more than 12 feet (or 3.6m). Applications of Zone Distances People breach our intimate zone because of two reasons: first, they are a friend or relative or the other person is making sexual advances; second, the other person could be hostile and about to make an attack. Another person breaching our intimate zone makes us uncomfortable. It causes a faster heartbeat and adrenalin is released. The body starts to get ready in case a fight or flight response is needed. So, if you put your arm (with no intention of violating or disrespecting) around a person that has just been introduced to you, may have a negative effect. They may get offended but try to smile through the discomfort. The general rule is to keep your distance. The distance between two people reveals clues of what their relationship is. Lovers can comfortably press their torsos against each other. This is different when you are in close proximity with a relative, friend, or stranger. An exception to this rule may happen when the social standing of a person is considered. To illustrate, the company’s CEO could be spending time off over the weekend with their buddy (who is also his subordinate), where they can move within each other’s intimate and personal zone. However, they maintain a safe distance when they are in the office (an unwritten code in the strata rules). Why People May Hate Riding in Trains and Buses Here are some of the unwritten codes that most cultures follow when people are forced into a place with a lot of people, like a packed bus, a big party, or standing in line at the grocery. e No talking to anyone, even with people you know. e Refrain from making eye contact with other people. e Keep that “poker face”. e Reading a newspaper or a book and pretending to be so engrossed with what they are reading. e Nobody movement is allowed in bigger crowds. e You watch the changes in the floor counters at all times. This is referred to as “masking” and it is common everywhere. This is a person’s attempt of hiding their emotions from other people by wearing a neutral mask. We usually hear some people refer to their commute as “unhappy” or “miserable”. These could because of the expressionless looks on the faces of a lot of travelers. These are actually misjudgments by observers. Spacing Rituals There is an unwritten rule when a person is caught in a sea of strangers. For instance, when one goes to the cinema, they will automatically look for a seat that is halfway between the end of a particular row and where the nearest person is seated. At a health club, a person would choose the hole with the biggest available space. Cultural Factors that Affect Zone Distances It is important to consider the cultural differences of people around the world. What is acceptable to the Americans could be unacceptable to Asians. So it is imperative that when you are around people of different cultures, you have to think twice about your actions. Chapter 18: The Most Common Gestures You ill See Daily s$ Pid i foy s This section will cover some of the most common gestures that you may see in your daily interactions with other people. Head Nod The head nod is one of the most commonly used and generally it means a “yes” or an agreement. It is a stunted version of a bow. Bowing is known as a submissive gesture, so the head nod signifies that you agree with the other person’s idea or point of view. The head nod has a different version in India. They rock their head from side to side, which is referred to as the head wobble, to say “yes”. For Westerners and Europeans, it may mean “maybe yes, maybe no”. On the other hand, in Japan, the head nod doesn’t mean “yes, I agree”, but usually it signifies “yes, I hear you”. In the Arab countries, locals use a single, upward movement of the head to mean “no”. Bulgarians use their “no” gesture to mean “yes”. Persuasion Tool Experts say that the head nod is a powerful persuasion tool. Studies reveal that a person will talk 3 to 4 times than usual when their listener nods their head. Slow nodding may mean that the listener is interested in what the speaker is saying. However, a faster version may be telling the speaker to finish up because the listener has become uninterested. Head Shake When someone shakes their head, it usually means dissenting or a “no”. When you are talking to someone, be mindful of their head gestures. They could be saying that they agree with your ideas yet making head shaking movements (which has a negative connotation), you should be skeptical about it. Basic Head Positions e Head up — is the neutral head position. The head remains still with a few occasional nods. When the head is lifted high with the chin pointing forward, it may mean arrogance, fearlessness, or superiority. e Head tilt — is a sign of submission. It makes the person appear smaller and less intimidating. e Head down — is a negative sign. It indicates an aggressive attitude. It connotes disapproval or dejection. Head Shrug When someone hears a loud noise behind them, they would usually raise their shoulders and pull their head down between the shoulders, that is the basic head shrug. When it use in a business or personal context, it could mean a submissive apology. When you need to walk past other people who are talking, you may pull out ahead and duck — head down with the shoulders tucked in to appear inconspicuous. Hands on Hips Gesture People do the hands on hips gesture to appear bigger in physical appearance. With the elbows up and pointed out, it may indicate the eagerness to dominate. It is also called the readiness gesture. It simply means the person is ready to take on an assertive action. The hands on hips gesture helps make you appear bigger and more noticeable. Cowboy Stance The cowboy stance is when the thumbs are tucked into the belt or into the opening of the pockets. It frames the crotch area. It is perceived to show a sexually aggressive attitude, usually from men. It is the most common stance in a lot of Western themed shows. A man doing this gesture may be giving a message, saying that “I can dominate”. Legs Spread Position You would usually see this gesture in men, often signifies dominance. There are women who feel intimidated when they see a man using the legs spread position in business transactions. Leg Over the Armchair You’ll often see this in men who frequently use the leg spread position. The man appears to be claiming ownership of the chair. it is also a sign that the person has an aggressive, informal attitude. It connotes a lack of concern for others, indifference, and informality. It can be an annoying position particularly when one is in a business transaction or meeting. Straddling a Chair The person who does this wants to control and dominate while protecting their front. They use the back of the chair as a “shield” to protect their body. This could lead to a person becoming more aggressive. Catapult The catapult is the seated variation of the hands on hips position, except that the hands are behind the head while the elbows are pointed out. This is associated with the males, and they use it to intimate other people. It may also mean they calm and relaxed. The “Starter” Position The classic position indicating readiness for action is when the person is leading forward, appearing to stand up, with one or both of their hands are resting on the knees. A variation is where the person is leaning forward with their hands gripping the armchair, like the race is about to start. Chapter 19: Meaning Behind Personal Accessories and Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses, and Make up — For this chapter, we will learn more about the secret signals behind regular items and habits we may have and use every day. Smoking According to experts, smoking is actually an outward call that is an expression of conflict or inner turmoil. It is more than an addiction, but rather about reassurance. People use smoking to release tension and stress. The non smokers release their tension through: e Gum chewing e Self grooming e Foot tapping e Nail biting There are two types of smokers: 1. Addicted smokers 2. Social smokers Experts say that longer puffs are used as a sedative and addicted smokers rely on the cigarette’s sedative effect. They usually smoke all by themselves. On the other hand, smaller and quicker puffs are said to help stimulate the brain to produce a higher level of awareness. These are the ones who smoke only in social gatherings or when they drink wine. When one is socially smoking, they actually smoke just 20% of the time, and the other 80% is all about body gestures. There are studies revealing that smokers feel “normal” when they smoke, so to feel “normal” they should always be smoking. Smoking is a venue for non verbal messages to be sent out. These signals that smokers usually make are often about how they feel about something. Their common rituals include waiving, flicking, tapping, twisting, and other small gestures. Women Who Smoke You might often see this posture wherein a woman is holding their cigarette high while their wrist is bent back as if posing for a social display. The front of their body is left vulnerable. Smoking draws attention to their lips. It also allows opening the wrists. Smoking is deemed unhealthy, and experts say that women who smoke are easily persuaded to do things. There are studies saying that women who smoke are twice as Many as men. Men Who Smoke For the men, they keep the hand over or below the chest level. This is how they protect their body. Their wrist is usually closed. They often use the “pinch hold”, which is said to be a more secretive hold. Men who smoke are perceived to be masculine and seductive. They use cigarettes and smoking to connote secrecy. Both men and women have the same number of puffs, however, men hold smoke in the lungs longer, putting them at high risk of contracting lung cancer. When a smoker is feeling confident, superior, or positive, they would usually blow out the smoke upward. On the other hand, if one is feeling secretive, suspicious, or negative will blow the smoke downward. Speed is also a consideration. The faster the smoke is blow in the upward direction, the more superior the smoker feels. The faster the smoke is blown downward, the more negative. Smokers are also known to take longer when they are making a decision or during stressful situations. They smoke to stall time. Cigar Smokers Cigar smokers are regarded to have a high status in society — as the cost and size of cigars connote superiority. Glasses Every accessory a person uses is an opportunity to look for gestures to get information about them, glasses are no exception. A lot of people perceive that those who wear glasses are smarter and more intelligent. But this first impression may last for only 5 minutes until you’ve spoken with them. Designer frames with different designs, plus colored frames often reduce the appearance of intelligence in people wearing glasses. There are people who say that those who wear glasses appear to be more authoritative, studious, educated, and intelligent. People look at glasses in the business perspective as a statement of power and maturity. However, there are those who prefer to wear frameless or smaller glasses, and they are perceived as powerless and weak. You may often see a person holding their glasses — one arm of the frame is in the mouth. Often, people who do this are stalling time. A person usually does this towards the end of a negotiation. When one peer over the glasses, it is perceived that the person doing it is judging the other person. It is more convenient to do this than remove the glasses, especially for those who are trying to scrutinize another person. People who wear very dark glasses on their heads to meetings come off as relaxed and youthful. Makeup When a woman in the business world is wearing makeup, it adds to their credibility. This is also good to make them presentable to clients. Women who wear makeup (coupled with glasses) are perceived to be intelligent, sophisticated, confident, and outgoing. Those without makeup and glasses are seen as having a good appearance but low on skills. The Lipstick There is a study about how wearing lipstick makes a difference. Results show that women who wear lipstick are perceived to be interested only in themselves and the attention of their male colleagues. The women who wear muted color variations are seen as businesslike and career oriented. Those who do not wear lipstick are seen as the more serious type. So, if you are a woman and you are going on a date, you should wear bright red lipstick. If you are going to the office or meeting with business people, you should keep it simple with understated color. Part 2: How to Use Body Language to Your Advantage You’ve learned what body language is all about and the different ways to read them. Now, it’s time to know how you can use this knowledge to your advantage. Chapter 20: Examples of Positive and Negative Body Language Body language can either connote a positive or negative behavior. We have grouped some of the most common body language postures and listed them here. Positive Body Language Your movements and your gestures are considered positive when you come off as open, approachable, engaged, and interested. e Head is tilted towards one side This generally means that the person is interested or listening closely to what is being said. e Briskly rubbing hands together The person is communicating that they are excited about something. It may also mean that they are waiting in anticipation. But this can also mean that the person is feeling cold, so it is important to consider the setting. e Open palms, facing forward When the palms are open, it is a sign of honesty and openness. It can also be a sign of submission. It can also be an indication of sincerity and innocence. In churches, worshipers are often seen with open palms, a sign of respect and submission to their god. e Upright posture, shoulders arched back This is an indication that the person has self confidence. People in this posture are often seen walking briskly. It may be an upright posture, but you still have to feel relaxed and tall, not too rigid. e Hand stroking the chin (or beard) This is an indication that the person is in deep thought. Often, the motion is unintentional, especially when one needs to make a decision on something important. It is also an indication of interest and thoughtfulness. e Leaning closer When you are interested in someone or you like them, the tendency is to lean your body in their direction. This motion is also an indication that you trust the other person. However, it is important to consider the other person’s personal space so that you don’t overdo the leaning. e Making direct eye contact When looking at the other person in the eye, it means that you trust that person. It is also an indication of your confidence. But unwavering direct eye contact can sometimes come off as creepy or plain scary. Do not stare. e Head nodding When you constantly nod your head, it is an indication that you are intently listening to what the other person is saying. It also means that you agree with what is being said. It is also a way to acknowledge that the other person has some valid points. When you smile while you nod your head makes the movement more positive. e Handshake A firm handshake is an indication of self confidence and respect for the other person. Reaching out for a handshake means that you are interested. Negative Body Language It is sometimes referred to as defensive body language. Movements and gestures make you appear insecure, wunapproachable, closed off, disinterested, or hostile. e Both arms crossed over the chest This is a classic motion of being defensive. It could also mean that the person does not agree with what is being said or done by the other person. e Nail biting When a person has a habit of biting their nails, it is indicative that they are feeling nervous, insecure, or stressed out. This is often an unconscious motion. e Hand on the cheek The person is also in deep thought or thinking of doing something. Often, the hand on cheek posture comes with a furrowed brow, which is a connotation that the person is in deep concentration. Someone who is already lost in their thoughts is not paying attention to what is being presented to them. e Drumming the fingers (or finger tapping) This may mean that the person is becoming impatient and an indication that the person is already bored. e Touching the nose This could have several meanings. It could connote disbelief or rejection. It can also mean that they are being untruthful. e Steeping the fingers When you see someone whose fingertips are placed opposite each other. It is a sign of control and authority. This is often used by superiors like managers. e Head held in the hands It can be an indication of boredom. It could also mean that the person is ashamed or upset, though they won’t want it to show on their face. e Locked ankles When one does this, whether standing or seated, it connotes apprehension and nervousness. e Ear pulling When you see a person pulling one of their earlobes, it could mean that they are trying to make a decision, but they are still unsure. It also indicates one’s inability to arrive at a conclusion. e Fig leaf position A person whose hands are crossed in front of their crotch area while standing is an indication that they are feeling uneasy. It can also mean that the person is an introvert. It is named such because the position of the hand resembles the look of a man in the Bible, wearing only fig leaf on the genitals. e Fidgeting Fidgeting is a sign that the person is insecure or nervous. They could be playing with their ring, bracelet, or watch as a way of shielding their body. It can also be an indication that the person is bored. e Sitting at the edge of the seat This could be an indication the person is mentally or physically on edge. Chapter 21: Mirroring and Matching — How We Build Rapport Ai. A Ever notice when you and your best friends are together, and you tend to act and sound alike? It could mean that you have been friends for a long time. There is actually a mechanism behind it. Copying another person’s body language and mannerisms is often referred by Behavioral researches as mirroring and matching. You can use mirroring and matching to build rapport and create relationships. People tend to be more comfortable around people they know. Mirroring is a simultaneous “copying” of the behavior and actions of another person. It is like a person who is creating mirror images of the other person’s actions and behaviors. When mirroring is done with utmost respect and discretion, it creates positive feelings. Matching happens when there is a built in “time lag”. To illustrate, if the seated person uncrosses their legs and leans inward as they speak, you’ll have to wait a few seconds before you can discretely adopt the same position. One of the most effective ways to quickly build rapport is to mirror and match the most unconscious aspects of another person’s behavior during a conversation. Matching External Cues Posture — Our body language reflects our feelings and attitudes, mirroring, and matching another person’s posture allows you to understand more about them. If the other person places their hands on the table, you wait for about 4 to 5 seconds before putting your hands on the table. The same applies when they shift to another position or when they cross their legs, etc. Be mindful. Gestures — To effectively mirror and match the other person’s gestures, observe each in context. Do they tilt their head, or do they nod? Do they position their hands in a particular way? The key is to discreetly mirror their gestures. Facial expressions — There are a lot of possible expressions, so you have to be observant. Are their brows raised? Are they in a frown? Language and Vocal Patterns Inflection/Tone — Make subtle adjustments to your normal voice to match the other person’s. But your “mirrored” should not completely deviate from your own. Never copy tonality outright. It’s distracting for a man with a deep voice to match a woman with a high pitched tone. You get the picture? Speech Rate — Matching the other person’s pace will create alignment, allowing you to match their energy level. But, as always, it has to come out naturally and subtly. Sensory Predicates Most of us tend to favor one of four sensory based systems that would help us understand our world — the word we choose describe our world and our experiences. The four systems are: auditory, auditory digital, visual, and kinesthetic/feeling. Auditory Predicates — May include phrases and terms like tell, listen, hear, sound, resonate, loud and clear, give me your ear, etc. Auditory Digital Predicates — Includes think, learn, know, process, consider, decides, experience, understand, motivate, make sense of, word for word, pay attention to, etc. Visual Predicates — These include phrases like look, see, view, clear, foggy, bright, focused, reveal, paint a picture, etc. Kinesthetic/Feeling Predicates — Include touch, grasp, feel, hard, concrete, fuzzy, sharp as a tack, unfeeling, get in touch, hand in hand, etc. When you speak the same language, it would be easier to build trust and then establish rapport. Matching the other person’s energy level helps create rapport. A good way to match the other person’s energy level is to mirror their breathing rate. It could be difficult but it’s effective. Just remember to mimic and not to resort to gimmicks. Chapter 22: Body Language for Your Interview First impressions last that is why when you are going to a job interview, you have to make sure that you make a good first impression. For this chapter, we will discuss some tips on how you can make a great impression. Keep in mind that no matter how good your credentials are, still, the interviewer would have made an initial assessment during the first four minutes. You have to make a good impact the moment you walk in and non verbal presentation is important. At the Reception Area If possible, leave your coat with the receptionist. Never walk into an office with your arms full. Always stand at the reception area, do not sit. Most receptionists will ask you to take your seat to get you out of their sight. Make sure you stand and slowly rock back and forth on your feet. Look confident and in control. This is an indication that you are still waiting. When Entering the Office As soon as the receptionist tells you to enter, do so without hesitation. Never stand in the doorway because this indicates that you are in doubt or lacking in confidence. The Approach Even if the interviewer is doing something, directly walk in. Be confident. Put down the laptop or briefcase, or whatever you have in your hands, then shake the other person’s hand, and take a seat. Make the impression that you walking into offices is not new to you. Maintain your confidence and make it appear that you don’t expect to be kept waiting. Handshake Return the pressure that you receive. Let the interview decide when the handshake would end. If circumstance allows it, walk to the left of a rectangular table as you approach. This will increase the odds of a handshake between right handed individuals who are equals. If you can, avoid handshakes directly across the office desk. It is wise to use a person’s name two times during the first 15 seconds. When You Take Your Seat If you are to sit on a low chair directly facing the interviewer, turn away about 45 degrees from the interviewer to avoid assuming the “reprimand position”. If you cannot angle the chair, adjust your body instead. Office Seating If you were asked to sit in an informal area, like an informal meeting table, take this as a positive sign since a lot of business rejections are given from behind a desk. Do not sit on a low sofa where you will sink so low because it will make you look physically inconsequential. If there are no other available seats, just sit upright on the edge of the sofa so you still have control over your body language and gestures. Angle your body 45 degrees from the interviewer. Be Mindful of Your Gestures When you are calm, you have control over your movements. Take note that high status people use fewer gestures compared to low status people. Mirror the interviewer’s gestures and expressions when possible. Personal Distance Respect the interviewer’s space, especially during the opening minutes. If you move too close at once, the other person might respond by leaning away from you. Your Exit If there are things to pack, pack them calmly and deliberately, never rush it, then turn and walk out. If the door to the office was closed when you came in, close it behind you when you leave. People tend to watch you from behind as you walk away, if you’re a man, the back of your shoes should be clean. If you are a woman, point your foot towards the door and adjust the back of your clothes and your hair — this allows you to have an excellent rear view impression as you leave. As you get to the door, turn around and smile a little. It’s a better image to leave than your rear end. : Body Language for Seduction pr el N $ i } reo oy f mer t AT OES atp = e> w d k B k "e n a ) P =I. LT i You cannot flirt without using body language. To be successful in the game of flirtation, the body should speak what your mouth cannot express. Flirtation involves various sequences of gestures and expressions, some are obvious, and some are nuance, but most are done subconsciously. Women would usually take the lead here, and it’s up to the men to decode the signals. The woman should respond to the signs that the man sends back, giving the man the green light to take it to the next level. For the man to succeed in this game of flirtation he should be able to read the signals she sends correctly. Getting Their Attention There is a 5 step sequence in courtship: Eye Contact — She searches around the room and spots a man she likes. She waits until the man notices her and when he does, she will hold his gaze for about 5 seconds before turning away. The man now keeps a watch waiting if she will do it again. She will have to deliver this gaze for three times (on average) before the man realizes what is happening. This is the start of the process. 18. Smiling — The woman delivers one or more fleeting smiles — this is just a quick half smile aimed at the man which means he can come over. However, a lot of men won’t respond to these signals, leaving her to thinking that he is not interested. 19. Preening — The woman sits up straight so as to emphasize her breasts and she crosses her legs (or ankles). If she’s standing, she tilts her hips, as she titles her head to the side towards one shoulder, thereby exposing her bare neck. She will then play with her hair for about 6 seconds. She may also lick her lips as she flicks her hair. The man will respond by standing up straight, expanding his chest, pulling his stomach, adjusting his clothing, tucking his thumbs into his belt, and touching his air. Both the man and the woman would their entire bodies towards each other. 20. Talk — He goes to her and attempts to strike up a conversation. He’ll begin with clichés like, “You look familiar, I believe I’ve seen you before” , and other worn outlines to introduce one’s self. 21. Touch — The woman will be on the lookout for the opportunity to initiate a light “accidental” touch on the arm. A touch on the hand brings intimacy to a higher level. Every level of touch is repeated to see if that person is receptive and to let them know that the first touch wasn’t actually accidental. She would lightly touch hisshoulder to give the impression that she cares about him. These five steps are critical when trying to start a new relationship. Common Signals Women Use for Seduction Men, take note of the following: e Hair flip A woman unconsciously tosses her head back or runs her fingers through her hair upon seeing the man she is attracted to. It exposes the woman’s soft underarm, which men consider to be irresistible, plus pheromone or sex perfume is released. Wet lips — A woman’s lips are considered to be sexy by most men. It also symbolizes her genital area. Experts say that when women are sexually aroused, their lips, breasts, and genital become larger and redder. Touching herself Women are more sensitive to the touch than men (who are more visual). When she leisurely stroke her neck, throat, or thigh, she is sending a message that if the man plays his cards right she might let him touch her the same way. Limp wrist — A bent wrist while walking or sitting is a submission signal used by women and gay men. Men are easily attracted because they can be the dominant partner. Playing with a cylindrical object — It could be a cigarette, the stem of a wine glass, a finger, or anything that is phallic shaped. The man may respond by fondling her car keys or her cigarette lighter, or anything personal that she owns as if saying that he wants to have her. Exposed wrists — A woman’s wrists, particularly the undersides are considered the most erotic places on her body as its skin is extremely delicate. She usually exposes her palms to the man while she’s talking. A woman who smokes usually holds her cigarette palm up right beside her shoulder, exposing her wrists. The sideways glance over a raised shoulder — A woman’s bare shoulder is said to mimic her breasts. She holds the man’s gaze with dreamy eyes long enough for the man to take notice, then she looks away. It creates anticipation and excitement on the part of the man. The head tilt — A head that is tilted to the side gives her a helpless yet appealing look. She is exposing her neck, which is a vulnerable part of her body. The head dip — This pose makes the woman’s eyes look bigger and herself appear smaller, she appears vulnerable and waiting for his protection. It’s a sign of submission. Rolling the hips — Nothing is sexier than a woman strutting her wide hips. Tilted pelvic — She is highlighting her figure when a woman does this pose. Placing her purse close by — Her handbag is a woman’s personal domain. When she is with a man she is attracted to, she may purposely stroke her bag, teasing the man. The knee point — A woman who sits with one leg tucked under the other and points to the man is sending a signal that she is attracted to him. Dangling her shoe — If she is on her seat and you see her dangling a shoe off her foot, she is sending a message to the man that she feels comfortable with him. Entwined legs — Men find a woman sitting with entwined legs as sexy and appealing. How About the Men? Men usually display their wealth, power, and status. Compared to women, men don’t have much of courtship signals and gestures. But let’s try to look at some of the signals men make. Their most direct sexual display towards a woman is the thumbs in belt gesture which highlights their crotch area. When seated, he may spread his legs wide. Women are triggered visually by certain aspects of a man’s body. Here is a list of the physical characteristics of the male body that may have an impact on women. Takeaway Muscular arms, chest, and broad shoulders — Most women are attracted to a well defined upper body, but they are not too keen on the bodybuilder look. Small, tight butt — For women, it’s sexy and it indicates strong forward thrusting motion during sex. Narrow hips and muscular legs — Men’s legs are considered symbols of power and endurance. The key to decoding body language signals is mindful observation. It never fails. Chapter 24: Body Language Techniques for Public Speaking Many people are afraid of public speaking. There are aspects of public speaking that you need to learn. If nerves easily get to you when you need to speak in public, we have listed a few tips to make you feel comfortable speaking in front of a huge crowd. Aside from preparing your presentation and talking points, here are body language techniques that you can use next time you need to speak in public. Posture e Stand upright with your shoulders back. e Place your hands in your pocket and never cross your arms. e Face your audience as much as you can possibly can. Keep your body open. Breathing e Your breathing should be relaxed. Take deep breaths to ensure that your voice has power. e Pace your speech with slow, measured breathing. Pause when you need to emphasize important points. Gestures e Emphasize words with hand gestures. e Your audience will get bored with one dimensional movements. Keep their attention by alternating gestures, incorporating your hands, your arms, and your head. e When you have visual aids, point and look at the relevant data. Your audience will follow your hands and eyes automatically. e Use positive gestures. Eye Contact e Make eye contact with your audience — move from face to face. This will keep them engaged. e When you are entertaining questions, maintain eye contact to connote credibility and sincerity. Movement e Move around the space to make your presentation more dynamic. e Use movements to illustrate transitions from one key point to another. e A step towards your audience, this will create a positive reaction from them. Use this technique if you want to persuade or encourage the audience. Facial Expression e Smile to make the audience feel at ease with you. Exude confidence at all times and use the above body language to capture your audience. Chapter 25: Effective Body Language echniques and Tips for Teachers and the Classroom yi aSSwWwọỌ rk i C] A=lem L e l =a ra If you are a teacher and you want to be the one to control the classroom, you should learn some body language techniques and this chapter have just that. Here some effective techniques you can use: Non verbal Tricks e Welcome Your Pupils At the start of the day, be at the door to welcome them as they arrive. This will help calm them down because they will have to slow down and go inside individually. Once everyone is inside, confidently enter the room and greet them with a loud and clear voice. e Show Your Hands The hands are our trust indicators, meaning other people will trust us if they can see our hands. Keep your hands visible while you are in front of your class. Do not put them in your pockets nor place them behind your back or under your desk. e Body Language of a Winner A winner has their shoulders rolled back, their feet are firmly on the floor, they have an open chest, and they maintain their head held up. The more confident you appear, the more confident other people will assume you are indeed confident. Experts refer to this as the “high body power”. While you are teaching, make sure your arms are hanging loose, keep your head up, and roll your shoulders back. This is you taking control of the classroom and your own material. e Utilize the Whole Classroom While you are discussing the lesson for the day, walk around the room. Do not confine yourself behind your desk because you are putting a barrier between you and your students. By moving around the room, they will also be on their toes. e Be Expressive Use your facial expressions during your discussions. Encourage a student who is looking tentative in answering your question by adopting a thinking pose (placing your finger to your chin). It helps them to think about the question before giving their answer. Make eye contact with each of them to let them know that you know what they are up to, whether good or bad. e Voice Modulation You can use a wide range of vocal intonations when presenting new material. To illustrate, use a loud and soft voice when you are discussing opposite words like “big” and “small” respectively. Being animated with your voice keeps them engaged, especially for younger students. e The Positive Force Field This is composed of several positive body language that helps manage your students’ anxiety and help motivate them. The positive body language includes smiling, nodding, leaning, and using open palms. These gestures are saying that you, their teacher, is easily approachable The non verbal gestures mentioned here will help foster a good teacher student relationship. You can try other body language gestures that you might come up with, after all, your students are different from each other, hence, they would also respond differently. Chapter 26: Effective Body Language echniques for Negotiations and Sales | Ms = Achieving success in negotiations and sales is more than just giving the right pitch. Taking control of your body language is a powerful business tactic that you can use. It is always a good idea to meet people in person whenever possible instead of relying on phone calls, emails, or online chat. The lack of visual cues provided by body language would be a concern. It would be a challenge to build rapport, which is integral if you want to close a sale. So, for this chapter, we listed nine body language techniques to use when you want to improve your negotiation and sales skills. 1. Show up to the meeting on time. The initial impression yov’ll make on a potential boss or a new client happens before you step into the meeting room. Being there on time means you value time — other people’s and yours. Tardiness is often viewed as being discourteous, and for some it is insulting. It is an indication of a lack of integrity and incompetence. Also, it is a source of stress on your part, making you distracted. You have ruined your chances even before you say a word. 2. Give the perfect handshake. So, you’ve successfully arrived on time for your appointment, now the next most important thing — the handshake. There is actually no perfect handshake — it just has to make the other person comfortable meeting you. A firm handshake (not too tight, not too loose) connotes sincerity and honesty. 3. Choose the “right” people. Your body language and your attitude will determine the success of the negotiation process. However, your intuition also matters, especially when you are just setting up the appointment — the body language and non verbal cues of a potential client are important because they might be agreeing to an appointment, but their gestures are saying otherwise. It is still good for you if you choose to pursue those who are genuinely interested because you’ll have a better chance of closing a sale or having a successful negotiation. 4, Maintain eye contact. Eye contact is one most powerful tools in communication because it conveys sincerity, openness, and trust. Not making eye contact or deliberately avoiding keeps a good rapport from developing. You come off as dishonest, even evasive, both of which might make closing a sale or negotiating rather difficult. However, there is another side of eye contact — the negative aspect — which is deemed intimidating or aggressive. So, avoid staring or holding the gaze too long, it is natural to look away when you need to think. 5. Be mindful of your facial expressions. You have to be aware of the facial expressions you are giving. Sometimes our expressions are automatic, like how we frown or wrinkle our forehead when we’re frustrated or when in deep thought. The negative gestures might not sit well with the other person. Nod or smile in agreement whenever possible. Do not look down and keep your chin up. Like you, the other person will be carefully assessing if your physical gestures mirror the words you say, so keep them both positive and open. 6. Respect their personal space. Just as you want them to respect your personal space, you should respect theirs. It is important that you don’t make the other person uncomfortable because you are leaning too close. As a safe rule, especially in the business setting, sit or stand at least 4 feet away from them. 7. Keep your arms and legs calm and open. Just as your words exude confidence, strength, and calm, so should your body. Be mindful of how your arms and legs are positioned. If you are unconsciously tapping your fingers or your feet, or crossing and uncrossing your legs, you are sending a message that you are stressed or uncomfortable. Keep it together and limit your movements. Avoid fidgeting. People often fail at negotiations or in closing important sales because their words do not mirror their gestures and expressions. Be mindful. 8. Keep your hands down. If you are like most people who add a lot of hand movements when emphasizing an important point, you’ll have to be aware of these movements. A general rule in negotiating is to keep both of your hands away from your face. Constantly rubbing or touching your face or head can be seen as a sign of anxiety, and you cannot afford to be seen aS an anxious person. Exude honesty, confidence, and truthfulness by keeping your hands away from your face — but be mindful to keep your palms open. 9. Slow down and pause. The stress of the negotiation, plus the desire to get your message across is enough to make you overenthusiastic causing you to rush your words, or worst, talking over the other person. You should listen to what they have to say, pause if you must, to let them know that you’re thinking about what has been said, and keep your response calm and slow. This is an indication of having respect, yet you are still confident in your position. The positive effects of your momentary silence might even surprise you — your silence might spark the other person’s insecurities. So, this could go to your advantage. Remember to be mindful of both your words and your body language in any negotiation. Chapter 27: Body Language Mistakes to Avoid By now, you already know that body language plays a vital role in how other people view you. If you do not watch yourself, you might end up looking disinterested, bored, dishonest, or lazy. We have listed below some of the common mistakes people make in terms of their body language. Leaning Back When having a conversation with another person, leaning back may mean disinterest. It can also be interpreted as being dismissive. If you want the other person to know that you are interested in what they have to say, sit straight up or you can lean in. Crossed Arms (Legs) This also connotes disinterest. It also makes you appear closed off. Rather than crossing your arms, you can place your arms at your sides or on the table in front of you. Failing to Make Eye Contact If you do not make eye contact, you are signifying that you avoiding something. Show your sincerity by making eye contact. Too Much of an Eye Contact Not looking into another person’s eyes may make you appear dishonest but looking at them for too long could be interpreted as a sign of aggression. It can be intimidating and uncomfortable for the receiver of the gaze. During a conversation, hold their gaze for about two seconds before looking away. Make eye contact once in a while. Clasped Hands People who are under a lot of stress usually do this. Hands are Hidden Behind the Back or in the Pockets Most of the time, this is an unconscious action. The person who does this is perceived to be hiding something. Touching Your Face This is also often done unconsciously. It is a sign of deception. Too Much Nodding Nodding is a positive gesture but doing it far too many times may make you look weak and insincere. It can also be a sign of indifference. Fidgeting Fidgeting is a sign of discomfort or boredom. Slumped Shoulders It can be a sign of dissatisfaction or unhappiness. Wrapping the Feet (or Ankles) Around the Legs of a Chair This is similar to the clasped hand gesture. It is a sign of discomfort. Big Gestures Making big gestures (when you are not speaking on stage) is seen as being arrogant. Pointing Your Feet to the Wrong Way When you are speaking to another person, your feet could be pointing towards their direction. However, there are times that you unconsciously point your feet away from the other person. Patting Your Legs This is a sign of feeling uncomfortable. Glancing at their Phone or Watch When you think that no one’s watching when you try to sneak a peek at your phone or your wristwatch, someone does take notice. It connotes disinterest or boredom. However, it’s different when you are waiting for an urgent message, then you can check your phone. Failure to “Mirror” If you fail to intently listen to the other person as they speak, you fail to “mirror” their body language. We’ve discussed how important mirroring is in the previous chapters. Body language is important in any conversation. Take time to think about the list above. Take control. Be in control. Chapter 28: Body Language and Deception a > a x fin sates otal SS Spotting deception is hard. If you know the other person it could be easier, but still, it’s not foolproof. You may try to compare their behaviors between how they act when they are actually telling a known truth and when you think that they could be attempting to deceive you. It is important to focus on a large array of clues. Listed here are some of the most common lying gestures: e Hand covering the mouth — is a subconscious gesture that could mean trying to suppress or hide something. Covering your mouth is a lower key form as the “shhh” gesture where one finger is positioned vertically over your lips. e Touching the nose — is a sign that has many interpretations. e An itchy nose — may mean the speaker is trying to hide their own deceit. If done by the listener, it could mean that they are having doubts about what the speaker is saying. e Rubbing the eye — is actually your brain’s attempt to block out the deceit, lie, and doubt. e Tugging the ear — is the adult version used by kids who want to block out their mom’s lectures. It can also mean that the listener has had enough and may want to be the one to speak. e Scratching the neck — is a sign of doubt or uncertainty. e Pulling the shirt collar — is a signal that may mean that the person is trying to hide something or being deceitful. e Fingers in the mouth — is an unconscious attempt by the person to go back to the feeling of security of the child sucking their mother’s breast. This happens when one is under a lot of pressure and is also connected to deception. Chapter 29: Evaluate Yourself Take a look at this image above. You’ll immediately see an elephant. However, when you closely examine the image you’ll see a lot of other things. Most people look at other people and they see the other person’s physical attributes, which is superficial. What people fail to see are the details that they didn’t see at once. It is the same with body language. It has been in existence for a million years but it's only in recent years that people have started studying and understanding body language. For this last chapter, you are given the chance to review how well you can read body signals now after reading this book. Take note of your impressions in terms of perception. You’d be surprised. Reading Between the Lines 1. Read the 3 signs. Answers: The palms are in the submissive position. Fingers are spread which may mean non aggressiveness. The entire body is open, with nothing to be concealed. This is a non threatening and open attitude. 2. Read the 4 signs Answers: This is a deceit cluster. As he rubs his eye he looks away. Both eyebrows are raised in disbelief. His head is turned away, which is also slightly down. 3. Read the 4 signs Answers: She appears to be disapproving. She is giving someone a sideways glance and her body is not turned towards the same direction as her gaze. Her head is slightly down (a sign of disapproval), her eyebrows are turned down (anger), and her arms are crossed (defensive). The corners of her mouth are also turned down. 4. Read the 3 signs Answers: The catapult position signifies a know it all attitude. The feet on desk shows he’s being territorial. He is seated in a defensive position. 5. Read the 3 signs. A ae N; 4 Answers: Classic hands on hips which makes her look bigger and more menacing. The head is tilted towards her feet, but her eyes are looking upward. xua 6. Read the 12 signs. Answers: The woman in the center is facing forward. We’ll assume that the meeting is near her desk. One of her feet is placed forward which connotes assertiveness. Her eyes are looking upward, an obvious sign of visualizing. The palm on one of her hands is facing upward, which means she is welcoming and open to others. The woman on the left connotes assertiveness with one foot forward. Her hands are on her hips which means innate confidence. Her head is tilted upward, which indicates contemplation. The man appears to be scratching his head which is a sign of doubt and uncertainty. He could be thinking of an alternative approach to their situation. His feet are evenly planted, his hand is on the hips, which indicates a positive frame of mind about everything. 7. Read the 14 signs. Answers: The posture of the guy connotes confidence. One hand is placed on the wall which may indicate he is taking ownership of the space. His other hand is on his hip displaying a man’s assertiveness. His body is pointed directly to the woman on the right side, hinting at his primacy interest at that moment. Another sign of ownership is his crossed leg position. His baseball cap is turned sideways, showing a lot of confidence. The body of the woman in the middle is positioned away from him. This is a clear sign of defensiveness and disinterest. She makes a sideways glance which means apprehensiveness. Her arms are crossed tightly signaling defensive anxiety. The woman on the right appears confused. His body is pointed away from the man. Her feet are held together which means a neutral attitude or it may also mean he’ll have to work harder to impress her. She is glancing sideways which means she could be interested, or it could also mean uncertainty. The open wrist with the cigarette is an obvious sexual display of potential interest. She is blowing the smoke upward which means positive confidence. Chapter 30: Conclusion Experts say that if you change your body language, there are a lot of things you can change how you view life. You can change your mood right before stepping out, so you’ll feel more confident at work, become a more likable person, and be more convincing. Changing your body language allows you to interact differently with everyone around you and in tum, they will respond differently to you. Learning how to read body language allows you to easily read people so you tend to understand them more and make a better impression on others. Personally, you become more aware of your own body language, allowing you to be mindful of giving out positive movements and gestures.
Chapter 1: Delving into Dark Psychology hen talking about dark psychology, it’s quite common to think about techniques like brainwashing and manipulation. But the fact of the matter is we don’t really know how deep dark psychology goes. After all, there is a definite method to the madness. We can’t just simply accept that dark psychology is some random phenomenon that occurs as a result of people’s wish to get their way. The truth is that there is a clear method that can be applied in various ways. That’s why this is devoted to analyzing the fundamentals of dark psychology and how it can become manifest in daily life. This will enable you to get a good foundation on this topic right from the beginning. It will allow you to begin to see the patterns that are evident in everyday life. What is Dark Psychology? For starters, it’s worth taking the time to define psychology, and subsequently, dark psychology. Generally speaking, psychology is considered to be the study of the human mind. However, broader definitions place psychology as the study of the mind and the soul. This broader interpretation makes it a bit harder to comprehend psychology as we don’t really know what the soul is. As such, it’s better to stick with the narrower vision of psychology which is the study of the mind. The mind, or psyche, is a place where thoughts, ideas and emotions can be located. This is important to note as understanding the fact that humans are made up of emotions will help you get a better feel for dark psychology. This assumption is based on the fact that emotions drive our actions and consequently influence the decisions we make. It is very rare to find individuals who maintain an objective view of life and the circumstances around them. As a result, most people tend to view things from their own personal perspective as opposed to seeing things detached from their personal emotions and valuations. Consequently, dark psychology is the application of general psychological concepts for personal gain. That’s a fairly straightforward assessment. If you plan to use psychology to help others manage their emotions and so on, then you are not in the domain of “dark” psychology. When you think about anything that’s dark, you ought to keep your mind focused on the fact that we're talking about personal gain and benefit as opposed to helping others feel better about themselves. Now, it should be noted that we’re not necessarily talking about harming others; it’s just a question of using these techniques for your personal gain. Dark Persuasion Versus Covert Emotional Manipulation When talking about persuasion, we’re referring to the act of getting an individual to comply with a certain set of demands and requests as a result of a compelling set of reasons. This implies that the manipulator must find a way to convince their target so that they follow suit out of their own free will. This type of approach implies that the target is acting out of their own free will. So, there is no manipulation to speak of. However, things change when we begin to talk about “dark” persuasion. In dark manipulation, we’re venturing into territory in which tricks and strategies are applied to essentially force the target to do one thing or another. Such tricks and techniques may include things like coercion. Coercion happens any time a manipulator looks to exert their influence through some sort of mechanism in which the victim has no choice but to comply lest they fact the circumstances of their non compliance. With emotional manipulation, the difference lies in the fact that the manipulator exploits certain emotional weaknesses that the victim cannot truly hide. For instance, a person who lacks affection may be tricked into doing the manipulator’s bidding out of the hope of getting the affection they seek. Moreover, the term “covert” implies that the manipulation taking place is not exactly open and obvious. Rather, it is done in a concealed manner in which the manipulator’s true intent is not evident, at least on the surface. Now, it should be said that cover emotional manipulation may happen instinctively on the part of the manipulator, that is, the manipulator isn’t fully aware that what they are doing is manipulation. This is common in people with a narcissistic personality. However, the situation really gets dark when these attitudes are done consciously and with premeditation. People Who Use Dark Psychology to Manipulate Others This is a broad question to discuss as virtually anyone can use dark psychology at any given time. Perhaps the line can be drawn when a person stops using compelling arguments and reasoning to influence others and resorts to other tactics that might be considered inappropriate or simply frowned upon by society. Such tactics aren’t always sanctioned by society but are commonly used. That is why they fall under the “dark” realm, considering the fact that if an individual is caught using them, they will most likely suffer from some type of repercussion. That being said, common areas in which you will find dark psychology are advertising, politics, religion, the workplace, relationships, family and entertainment, to name a few. When you think of these areas, perhaps the thought of dark psychology doesn’t immediately jump at you. But when you begin to peel back some of the layers, you will find that they are prevalent throughout our daily interactions. Let’s consider advertising for a moment. A common tactic such as “limited time offer” is perfectly valid is the offer is indeed for a limited time. However, a long running infomercial uses this call to action all the time. After a while, it’s obvious that it’s not a limited time offer. It’s just a ploy that’s used to get others to buy right then and there. Perhaps a more forthcoming approach might have been to be honest that the offer stands “while supplies last.” The “limited time offer” tactic enters the realm of dark psychology the moment advertisers are lying to consumers. When consumers finally figure out that it’s just a ploy, the advert ceases to work. And just like this example, the world is littered with such ploys. The difference lies in that some are much more elaborate than others. Another classic example is politics. Politicians spend a great deal of resources trying to figure out what voters want to hear. Then, they go out and say the things that will resonate with voters. The same goes for religious cult leaders. They generally prey on the primal emotion of fear. They tell people that it’s the end of the world. So, they need to get on board before they are left behind to suffer. This is how cult leaders gain a huge following in a short period of time. Dark Persuasion Throughout History There is nothing new about dark psychology and persuasion. These tactics have been around as long as humans have. Initially, persuasion played on the primal emotions of humans such as fear, hunger, greed, and lust. Over time, these techniques, while still the same at their core, have become more and more refined. The end result is a system of techniques that have become so subtle that the average individual can’t really figure out it’s there; that is, until they are clued in. However, it wasn’t until the early 20th century in which advertising, thanks to the emergence of the first mass media outlets, really began to take off. This new domain allowed folks such as Edward Bernays, known as the “father of public relations” to really begin using covert tactics for the purpose of getting their message across the general public. With the rise of the internet, access to a global audience has never been easier. This is why social media has become so prevalent over the last 10 years or so. We are literally in the midst of a revolution in which anyone with access to the internet can potentially get their message out there without much restriction. We are not quite sure what the future holds. But one thing is certain, however people communicate in the future, there will be a way in which manipulators will be able to use those means to their advantage. Manipulators evolve with the times. So, should you. That is why reading books such as these will allow you to gain insight into the mind of these individuals. In the end, the best way that you can guard yourself is to be clear and what to expect whenever you come into contact with the various types of media out there. The Effects of Dark Psychology The effects of dark psychology have a wide range. These can go from getting someone to buy one product to voting for a political candidate. It should be noted that we are not focusing entirely on mind control, that is the type of persuasion that can lead manipulators to order victims to kill people. We’ll be discussing how each of the techniques involved can create a response in you that will compel you to get the latest phone or purchase a specific brand of clothing. Moreover, these effects can essentially blind your sense to the true intentions of manipulators. In many ways, you will find that there is an attempt at your free will. Again, we’re not talking about cartoonish attempts to control your mind. We’re talking about playing with your feelings so that you can sign up for a cult or a political party. In some of the darkest twists that you can find, manipulators find ways of taking over people’s opinions and perspectives to the degree that a single organization can control an entire country. This can lead to the control of an entire social group by a reduced number of individuals. Of course, this isn’t something that happens overnight. But when you are aware of how manipulation can be used, you will find that it’s not quite as hard as it seems. Chapter 2: The Dark Triad ecause of the personality traits that are possessed by some people, it may be difficult to deal with them as they may always come off as disagreeable. For those who manage to get close to them, they may be volatile, domineering and very arrogant. However, if one can manage them carefully, it is possible to develop their strengths and neutralize those unsavory elements that are present in their behavior to bring team harmony back to life. There are, however, other behaviors and characteristics that can cause serious damage to a person when he displays a combination of these traits, which may be toxic. When he is a member of a team, he may undermine his colleagues in ways that could be lasting, and many people even go as far as poisoning or destroying the team. Psychologists in various studies have come up with three different traits that make up the dark triad. These traits are: Machiavellianism, narcissism and psychopathy. Let’s take a critical look at this dark triad to know the behaviors that are associated with them and look at the ways in which they may have impacts on work and social relationships. Understanding the Dark Triad It is not very likely for you to have heard the term “dark triad” anywhere around your workplace even though it is one of the buzzwords in the field of psychology that is used to refer to three different but related personality traits. Machiavellianism This word, as you may have rightly guessed, comes from the famous 16th century Italian politician and diplomat, Niccolo Machiavelli, who was notorious for his book, the Prince, written in 1513. The book was interpreted to be his way of endorsing the dark art of being cunning and deceitful when it comes to diplomacy. When it comes to Machiavellianism, duplicity, self interest, manipulation and a complete lack of emotions and morals are major characteristics. Those who suffer from Machiavellianism are usually very focused on their own selfish interests while they try to deceive, exploit and manipulate other people in order to achieve their own goals. A person with the Machiavellianism trait will possess and exhibit some or many of the following tendencies: e Focus on their personal interests and ambitions. e Give high priority to money and power above relationships. e Perceived by others as both charming and confident. e In order to get ahead, they tend to exploit and manipulate other people. e Tells lies and is deceitful when he thinks it is required. e Prone to flattery. e Lack values and principles. e Appear to be aloof or very hard to get to know. e Cynical of any form of goodness and morality. e They will easily cause others to harm to enable them to achieve their own means. e Has very low levels of empathy. ° Often very scared of commitment or any form of emotional attachment. ° Thanks to their calculative nature, they can come off as very patient people. e They will not easily reveal their true intentions. e Always prone to having casual sex. e Experts in reading social situations and other people. e Lack of warmth when it comes to social interactions. e They are often not aware of the possible consequences of their actions. e May have a little difficulty in finding/identifying their own emotions. The Machiavellianism Scale: This is a test that gives a score of up to a hundred. It consists of many questions and those who score anything above 60 are “high Machs” while those who score anything below 60 are “low Machs.” High Machs are typically very engrossed in their personal well being, as they are of the opinion that a person must be deceptive in order to be able to get ahead in life. They do not easily trust the potential goodness of other humans as they also think that it is naive to depend on other people. They, however, give priority to power above love and connection. Ultimately, they do not believe that there is a natural tendency for humans to be good. Unlike the high Mach, a low Mach is always empathetic to other people and is honest in their dealings with others. They are also very trusting and believe in the goodness of humanity. To a low Mach, if you can abide by good morals you will succeed in life. When a person scores too low on the Machiavellian scale, he tends to be too submissive and will agree too much with the opinions of others. Narcissism This takes its root from the Greek myth of Narcissus, which tells a story of a hunter that fell in love with his own reflection in a pool of water that he eventually drowns in. When it comes to people with the narcissistic trait, they are known to be arrogant, boastful, overly sensitive to criticism, selfish, and lack empathy. The Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD) is a mental disorder that has to do with a pattern of selfish and arrogant thoughts and behavior which comes with the lack of empathy and any form of consideration for others. Also, this disorder comes with an excessive craving for admiration. People who are living with NPD are often described as cocky, selfish, manipulative, patronizing and demanding. These attributes are often reflected in all the areas of the life of a narcissist from work, friendship, family, to intimate relationships. Those with this disorder do not find it easy to change their behavior as they are typically always resistant to change their behavior even though it is causing a lot of problems for them. They usually tend to turn to other people to put the blame on, and because of their overly sensitive nature they react badly to criticism in the slightest form or any sort of disagreement or perceived slight on their person. They identify all these as an attack. When a person is in the life of a narcissist, they tend to just go along with them instead of having to face their coldness and rage. The following are the symptoms of narcissism: e A grandiose sense of self importance/self worth. e Lives in a world of fantasy which gives support to their delusions of grandeur. e Ina constant quest for praise and admiration. e An exaggerated sense of entitlement. e Often demeans, bullies, belittles and intimidates other people. The type of self love that is exhibited by narcissists is not the genuine type, as their quest for admiration is always driven by their need to shield their insecurities. In fact, the narcissistic personality is the most insecure of the dark triad. For a narcissist, there is a weakness that they wish to shield. So, in order to accurately shield this weakness, they turn to others to boost their self image. To do this, they must put in a lot of mental and physical work, and it is in this that his dysfunctional attitudes begin to show itself. Psychopathy This personality trait has to do with the lack of both empathy and remorse. It is also characterized by antisocial behavior, as well as a manipulative and volatile attitude. A good point to note is the fact that there is no delineation between the traits of being psychopathic and being a psychopath when it comes to the common association of the trait with criminal violence. Although the exact causes of psychopathy are not known, it is said to likely be a combination of genetics, environmental and interpersonal factors. The genetic influence, for example, is suggested by the fact that children whose parents are psychopaths are likely to be psychopaths too. Also, the early life experiences of some people contribute to the increase in the risk of becoming a psychopath. Other factors that may lead to psychopathy includes poor parenting whereby a parent focuses on punishing the child more than they reward them. The abuse of substances by parents, separation, neglecting a child or physical abuse are other risk factors that may contribute to becoming a psychopath. The Hare Psychopathy Checklist Revised is commonly used to identify psychopaths. This checklist identifies and makes use of the following symptoms and signs of psychopathy: e A grandiose sense of self worth. e A constant craving for stimulation. e Superficial charm and glibness. e Being a pathological liar. e Being cunning and manipulative. e Absolute lack of remorse or guilt. e Absence of empathy exhibited by the callousness. e Lack of deep emotions. e Living a parasitic lifestyle by using other people. Lack of control over one's behavior. Sexual promiscuity. Early signs of behavioral problems. Absence of realistic long term goals. Easily acts on impulse. Irresponsible behavior. Blaming others for one’s own faults and not accepting responsibility. Having several marital relationships. Delinquency at a young age. Tends to revoke a conditional release. Criminal tendencies/acts in several areas of life (criminally versatile). Chapter 3: Emotional Manipulation What Is Emotional Manipulation? ow would you feel or react when you realize that for the longest time you had been acting out of the script of someone else? That is, you have been in control of your own actions and also your life as a whole. If it sounds scary and probably annoying, that is what emotional manipulation is all about. While a lot of people talk about emotional manipulation, there are still many who don’t know what it is all about. Emotional manipulation, or sometimes called psychological manipulation or “mind effing” is used to refer to the behavior which is intended to change the attitude as well as the behavior of other people by using deceptive, devious and sometimes abusive means. The manipulator psychologically or socially influences their victims to respond or behave to situations or issues in a manner that is unoriginal to their victims but which suits their purpose. This is classic manipulation because while you are acting out of that person’s script, you will think that you are still yourself. Emotional manipulation usually doesn’t involve using force but has a lot to do with playing with someone’s emotions and mind (psychological) to exploit them. It’s very hard to credit this concept with advantages if any, because of the covert nature of the work that goes into it and also the end results. Emotional manipulation compares to when someone uses what belongs to you to feed their own desires but in a covert manner and without your permission. While the manipulator acting in secrecy is definitely an issue, the biggest issue is when the manipulator makes you do things you wouldn’t normally do or things that don’t consider as good, or you seriously object to. Usually, when a person is ignorant of the tactics or techniques that the manipulator is using on them, they may not be able to break loose from the spell. They will keep convincing themselves that they are in charge of their life when they are actually not. But knowing the techniques can easily make them identify when they are being used. And while emotional manipulation is generally considered a bad thing, there may be times when you will need it to get what you want from people who have not been very cooperative with you and having knowledge of the tactics used would go a long way in helping you in such situations. Basically, emotional manipulators identify their victim’s psychological weak points and then work on them. This is only wise because if one makes a mistake of manipulating the other where they are the strongest, the manipulator will fail before they even begin. Expert manipulators look at an aspect that makes their victim vulnerable and work through that. The best practical tactics and techniques to emotionally manipulate others We have discussed tactics that manipulators use to manipulate their victims psychologically. While it is just the same thing, the following tactics are very specific to emotional manipulation. These tactics are not just limited to the ones discussed since every other day; manipulators are orchestrating new ways to get what they want from people. 1. Projection Projection is a diversionary tactic that manipulators employ to shift their shortcomings or deficiencies to another person. Instead of accepting responsibility for their errors, they would rather make another person take the blame. It is a psychologically abusive tactic that aims at taking the burden of guilt off their shoulders and mounting it onto someone else’s. The main motive here is to paint themselves clean, and the other person looks dirty and unfortunate. However, in a lousy situation, the manipulators are not usually the only ones to blame. It is not uncommon to encounter individuals like this once in a while. The moment a problem or defect is identified somewhere they are, such kinds of people are quick to find a victim on whom to lay the entire blame on. For example, a lazy employee who hasn’t been a good performer at their place of work, and also, the company where he works is not doing well. Being an emotional manipulator, the lazy employee will blame the company’s management as a reason for the loss. You will find them saying that the management has been ineffective or incompetent, and in the process, he leaves his own laziness out, which is actually of the main reason the company is in financial woes. Such kinds of people exist in intimate relationships. For example, instead of a partner admitting their need for intimacy, they would turn things around and accuse the other partner of being too clingy and also that they are only doing the other a favor. Their main aim is to appear stronger when they are actually the weaker ones. This manipulative tactic is also common in people who are quick to notice and point out the wrong in others. But in actuality, they are projecting their negative selves. 2. Intimidation To intimidate is to frighten or overawe another person, especially to make them do what one wants. Emotional manipulators usually apply the technique of intimidation to silence people who they consider a threat to them. In the case of a confrontation, they would look at the other into the eyes and with strange body language so that they can induce fear and distract their victims from their train of thought and make them end the debate. Emotional manipulators use this tactic to victims who are easily frightened or cajoled. As we have mentioned many times before, manipulators are very skilled at identifying the weak points of their victims and use that to exercise control on them. Once they realize that you are easily frightened, using intimidation and threats are some of the techniques they would constantly use on you. If someone exercises this manipulation on you, the best way to get out of it is by overcoming your fears and learning to stand up for yourself when intimidated. In fact, preventing yourself from revealing your weaknesses or fears to someone you can’t trust is one of the precautionary moves you can take to avoid such situations. 3. Magnifying their own problems while diminishing that of others This is also another covert emotional manipulation tactic. Emotional manipulators start by pretending that they are sorry for the things that you are going through, and while at it, they may also put on a show of short lived empathy. This is usually a ruse to hide their true intentions. But soon after, they would quickly bring up their own problems or challenges and magnify them so much that yours end up looking insignificant. One that this manipulative can be identified is when the other person always remember they have a problem the moment you bring up your own. Instead of helping you find a solution, they would rather bring up their own and start discussing it endlessly. This unwarranted comparison can be both frustrating and annoying because it denies you the sympathy that you so much need at that point. Also, it can even make you look or feel stupid to have raised your issue at that moment. In the end, they succeed in making you feel like you are intolerant; at the end of the day, your problems are not the worst. 4. Intellectual bullying Overwhelming someone with intellectual facts is one of a kind tactic that people use to manipulate others. Don’t get it wrong though, they may not always be accurate in what they are quoting but what they do know is that the other person doesn’t have access to or a chance to verify what is being said as valid. This way, they are able to place themselves before the other as an authority of some kind in order to have a way with them. This emotional manipulation tactic is common at point of sales or in financial institutions. Because they are sweet talkers and you can’t confirm their alleged claims, you may end up falling for their tactics unknowingly. One of the ways of avoiding to fall in this trap is knowledge; that is, being informed. You don’t necessarily have to know everything but strive to know something about everything. 5. Name calling One of the character traits of emotional manipulators is that they have an exalted opinion of themselves that is usually false. To them, other people are never right while they are never wrong. In fact, most emotional manipulators have been said to be narcissists. Therefore, when you are about to challenge their ego by putting their thoughts and opinions into question, be prepared to be called more names other than those in your birth certificate. To be frank, if you haven’t learned to develop tough skin by now, it would be easy for you to succumb to manipulation, especially out of annoyance. It is never fun to be called names like an idiot, troublemaker, fanatic, extremist, or any other name or title. The main goal that the manipulators try to achieve by doing this is to dirty your intentions and end up silencing you. 6. Conditioning Conditioning is a psychological training method of an animal towards a particular taste or trait that the trainer wants. Now imagine that on a human being. Of course, the manipulator would do this secretly. Through emotional manipulation, the victim is the one being “trained” by the manipulator. The idea here is to make the victim do away with their initial values and instead embrace those of the manipulator. For example, if a victim values honesty, then the manipulator would present anything good in life as dishonest. That way, the victim will end up associating honesty with a set of wrong values. The main reason that manipulators do this is so that the victim fails to proceed further and might even end up being disgraced. 7. Gossiping and stalking Every emotional manipulation tactic’s main aim is to control a person. However, when manipulators find it hard to control their targeted victim, they look for other ways to achieve that by controlling how other people view or see the victim. This can be achieved by spreading false information behind the victim’s back and other times monitoring their movements. The idea here is to not only give people a bad impression about the victim but to also intimidate them. For example, when a partner hints at ending a relationship due to the other partner’s bad habits, the other partner would go around spreading lies. The intention behind this is to get people to generally dislike the victimized partner due to the lies being spread instead of people getting to know the truth. 8. Bad surprises It is nice to be surprised once in a while, especially from a loved one. But surprises from an emotional manipulator comes differently; they are used as a tool to throw their victim’s off balance. A manipulative person would keep a promise only to say at the last moment that it won’t be possible. The main aim here is for the manipulator to get a psychological advantage over the victim by putting them in a situation where they can’t do anything but yield to their demands. At that last moment, when the victim doesn’t have any other option, the manipulator would bring out their egoistic demands that the victim would have no option but to meet them. This tactic is common among business people, and the Okey to staying out of it is to reach a legal agreement before signing a deal. 9. Personality marketing This tactic involves a person selling their alleged good qualities to another before they even get to know them personally. When the manipulative person here realizes the qualities that their targeted victim wants to associate with, they come sneakily blowing their own trumpets and marketing those qualities the victims prefer. This is a technique commonly used by politicians. They identify the qualities that their voters want in a leader and market themselves like that. It is only after they have been voted in the office that they would start showing their true colors. 10. Demeaning sarcasm While making it look like a joke, manipulators would mention things that their victim is struggling with in an underhanded way. This is meant to create feelings of insecurity to the victim and eventually overpowering them. Manipulators usually apply this tactic when they feel like their victim is getting too much recognition or attention. Demeaning sarcasm is done when a person cracks jokes about some struggles or failures in another person’s life like a failed exam or marriage. Such things aren’t anywhere near funny, but manipulators will make jokes out of them. While it may appear that it is just clowning, what the manipulator is trying to achieve is to make other people realize that the victim isn’t perfect or they aren’t worth as much as other people thought. 11. Triangulation This emotional manipulation tactic is very common in romantic relationships. It is also one of the emotional narcissists’ leading characteristics. The idea here is for the manipulator to validate their own selfish and wrongdoings towards their victim by making recourse to another party’s act. For example, a victim would be abused, and then when making a fuss, the abuser, without apologizing or admitting their wrong, would then direct the attention to another friend of the victim who was slapped by a partner and didn’t make a fuss about it. The main intention here is to make the victim look like they are overreacting and also the abuser or manipulator would technically be validating their action. The principle of triangulation is to divert the victim’s attention by comparing an upsetting event of a third party to justify their current wrongdoing. 12. Boundary testing Boundary testing is when manipulators test their victims to see how far they can go in crossing the victim’s line before they trespass the victim’s personal boundary. They cross one line at a time until they get deeper into their victim’s head. This is a very common tactic among abusers. First, they would talk condescendingly to the victim, when they show “excessive understanding” the next time they would slap them and if the victim accommodates that as well, it won’t be very long after that when they would turn into a punching bag. The reason this tactic succeeds is the victim choosing to show empathy rather than stand up to themselves. Narcissists, the most chronic emotional manipulators thrive in this. Their main concern isn’t empathy but rather the consequences of their actions. Therefore, the more they succeed in decapitating their victim, and nothing happens, the more they move a notch higher. 13. Judging others This is one of those emotional manipulation tactics that is done openly; anyone else apart from the victim knows and sees it. The manipulator would deliberately pick on their victim, especially when they know that there is nothing the victim can do right away. The most egoistic and self centered emotional manipulators are the ones who display this characteristic very often. They would keep bringing out their victim’s fault and brush aside their good efforts so that other people would view them negatively. Also, this tactic helps fuel the manipulators' ego because the more they judge the victim, the more they are portraying themselves as, the better one. The victim can save themselves from this tactic by severing ties with the manipulator and avoid showing considerations of any sort. Chapter 4: Deal with Manipulators y now there are many things which we are clear of in terms of a manipulator, their techniques, characteristics, also about covert manipulation and dark persuasion. All these things are practical and important to know especially when you deal with numerous kinds of people every day. All of us can be manipulative certain times, but what matters is the reason for manipulation is positive or negative. It becomes really crucial for you to know and understand who is trying to manipulate you and trying to convince you for doing something that you are not interested in. Manipulative people always facade your interest as theirs. Manipulators purpose is to shake your confidence to the extent that to make themselves strong they would do whatever the manipulator says. They use all the possible manners to attract you and be with you, they would do everything possible to take benefit from you. If not by the love they also use other tactics to get the work done such as by being pushy or threatening you. It is very substantial to understand these manipulative people before time or you should beware of the steps to take to handle them or how to maintain distance from them. There are also times when you get addicted to emotional manipulators and it becomes difficult for you to get rid of them. If a situation like this ever occurs, you should always ask yourself that do you remain frustrated, angry, dissatisfied or guilty because of that person or is there some other reason. If the answer is yes, you would still feel tough to stay away from that person, but you should face it and think that you can do it. These people are very magnetic and know how to keep you attracted towards themselves. Manipulators are very good at judging you, so they know when to joke with you and how much of it can you handle and when to stop, they have this miraculous sense in them which keeps you attached with them. This does not mean that they are thinking about you, it is just that they know when and how to take the advantage. When they achieve what they were looking for they forget your needs and just focus on their health and requirements. And the worst part about them is that if you do not meet their needs and demands, they might show up their real side of anger and aggression. Also, they make you so bound to themselves that you feel that you are so bound to them that you cannot do anything without their validation or approval, which is what their purpose is. The next thing that they take care of is that they know how much to give and take so that it does not come too much on them. So, first, let us understand and know about some practical tips to deal with manipulative people 1) Find out if they are using forceful behavior These people can get the work done by any means be it love, threat, indirect ways, by being forceful too. They might even threaten you that if you do not do what they want, then they would harm you in other ways so that they can gain control over you. They might do this to stop you doing certain things or do a certain task for them. Therefore, you should know how to say no to them as once to do something for them, they can always threaten you. The only way to keep them happy is by fulfilling what they want, so make sure that you say them a no if it is something that you do not wish to do. This is the most practical way of getting rid of them in the start only as once you entertain them, they would always trouble you with something or the other. 2) Do not compromise Guilt is both powerful and useless emotion. It is powerful because it can lead you to change your mind and feel bad for something. It is useless when manipulators unnecessary blame you for something which is not your fault. Guilt is a tool which the manipulators use very much, they might use it to make you feel guilty for your past mistakes or failures or not making them happy or agreeing to what they say. Even when you feel good about yourself or confident, they would have a problem with that and might ask you to stop feeling overconfident about yourself. They would never motivate you for anything instead would try and generate doubt in you regarding your skills and abilities. The only solution for this is being confident and stop feeling guilty; it is your life and trust yourself and your abilities instead of thinking of others comments. Have self belief and stop compromising on anything, trust yourself and move further. 3) See if they overdo things You must have observed this in many people that they do something small for you and show that they have done something huge for you. They would expect you to return the favor and if you do not, they would start complaining. They can go to any extent to gain your attention. They might show you fake tears and say that they feel lonely or unloved. Do not let them fool you as they only know is to lower down your self esteem. You should have your own self respect and face them by clearing out your expectations and what you can give. This would make a clear understanding between both of you and they will also have a clear understanding that you cannot be insulted or humiliated by them. 4) Take new opportunities People who do not want you to be successful would always want you to put your eggs in one basket only. Manipulators would always want that you stick around one opportunity all your life. They would always say that why are you being so greedy, just be content with what you have. But in contemporary times, this statement does not work. It is vital for you to grow and look for new opportunities. Manipulators are very insecure and jealous, so they would want you to stay at the same place where they feel you are secured. But you should listen to yourself and take your own decisions as they might call you selfish or too much arrogant and you might feel that you are being heartless by not listening to them. They would want you to be dependent on them and stay less successful than them. The only way to get out of all this is by achieving what you want, look for new jobs, start a business if you want and make new friends. This would make you more confident inside and also give you the courage to fight them. 5) They might use charm to impress They might act very sweet and use their charm so that you could not say no to their request. This is the unique way to make you feel burdened so that it becomes difficult for you to reject their request. For example, they might ask you for a tea or coffee and then while talking they might ask for a favor, which they might be tough for you to straight away say no. Not even at the office even at times on a personal level, you face this. Such as by the husband might ask for his wife to go shopping when they want to go out with their friends. But the only practical way of getting rid of this kind of situations is by being assertive and saying no. It might be difficult for you at that time but it would make your life easy and sorted. 6) Ignorance This is the key to stay happy and move on. When it comes to manipulators they are always meant to be ignored, as they deserve it. These people play dirty tricks with you by holding you accountable for things which you have not done, never taking accountability, do not act as they promise and try by all means to make you feel guilty. You might think that you can talk it out with them and solve it but it would be a waste of time. If you would try to correct them, they would instead entangle you in their conversation and you would again be in their trap. Their major tactic is that if you cannot convince, then confuse them, so they work on this principle and confuse you. So, the only thing you should do is ignore them completely. If you cannot ignore them fully as they are your boss or subordinates, then try to walk off where they are standing, do not respond much when they speak and find another way of getting your work done if possible. 7) Are they handling facts perfectly They would try to mould the facts shown by you by saying that they know everything and try to change the numbers according to their requirements. This clearly means that they are trying to fool you and faking that they know the statistics but actually they are trying to act clever. They also try to keep some important information to them so that only they use it and you do not. They also try to play smart by telling you some useless information in such a manner that it is very productive and can be used wisely in the project. So, the solution to this is do not believe in whatever they say, double check the information through your sources. Do not go according to their information if you have any doubt on their intent. 8) Stop taking permission The major issue with people is that they think that it is mandatory to take permission for everything and they get used to it. We are habitual of taking permissions since our childhood days, such as asking our parents to go out with friends, asking the teacher if you can go out and play, as an employee you ask your boss for leave, etc. This makes you so much used to it that you forget making your own decisions and understand what is right and wrong for you. This habit makes your confidence low and you become afraid of talking in front of others and keeping your opinion. The best solution to this is by doing what you like and makes you feel good. Stop thinking about others and making them comfortable. Make your choice today and remove yourself from the trap of permission and live freely. This must have made very clear to you that how can you deal with manipulative people. Just remember that manipulators have absolutely no right to lead your life and cannot make you do what you do not want to do. You can make mistakes without any guilt and learn from them. Just cut people like these from your life and stay with like minded people who make and keep you happy. Chapter 5: Characteristics of Manipulative People ne of the most important things to consider in this discussion is how manipulators select their victims. A victim, by definition, is the recipient of the manipulator’s actions. Therefore, the victim suffers negative consequences from the behavioral patterns exhibited by the manipulator. On the whole, victim selection is generally random. This means that manipulators will simply sniff around looking for someone they can take advantage of. When there is a greater amount of premeditation in the selection of a victim, then we might be dealing with a psychopath. As such, these individuals might make more careful study as to the type of person they seek to attack. Nevertheless, most manipulators will simply seek out those who are closest to them. This is why family tends to be the first target on a manipulator’s radar. Generally speaking, manipulators look for weak individuals whom they feel won’t be able to put up a fight. This means that for one reason or another, the victim is powerless to stop them. When you think of physical violence, this is one of the main criteria that goes into the selection of a victim. On a deeper, more emotional level, manipulators will seek out people who stand to lose quite a bit more than the manipulator. Think about that for a moment. Let’s go back to the example pertaining to the workers who must deal with a manipulative boss. In the end, the workers need the job far more than the boss does. If anything, the boss manipulates the employees more for personal pleasure than a logical business reason. Consequently, the workers are faced with a dilemma: they either put up with the manipulation or find another job. The ultimate objective of the manipulator is to subdue their victims to the point where they will offer resistance to the manipulator’s tactics. This means that the victim eventually becomes complicit in the manipulator’s behavior. Sure, there are instances where the victim is unable to extricate themselves from the abusive situation they are in. In such cases, the victim can only hope to endure the situation until a time comes when they are able to finally get out. Highly skilled manipulators will take the time to scout for potential victims. This occurs when a manipulator is able to identify the choice traits they are looking to find in their victims. As such, they will scout their surroundings and places they perceive will have the highest number of vulnerable individuals. That is why it’s always a good idea to be skeptical of someone you don’t really know in a place that you often go to. You never know who you might be dealing with. Signs of a Manipulative Partner One of the objectives on the mind of a manipulator might be to find a partner they can manipulate. This may occur either as a conscious behavior or an instinctive one. In the event of instinctive behavior, you can assume that the manipulator is not acting out of malice, but rather out of their own sheer desire. When you consider a conscious choice on the part of the manipulator, then you might actually be dealing with an evil individual who has a hidden agenda. So, it is important to recognize the warning signs before it’s too late. On the whole, manipulators can be easily spotted in romantic relationships by the subtle hints and lapses they show. For example, they appear to be Sweet and attentive, but suddenly change and appear to be disconnected. You can tell this by seeing in the way they pay attention to your conversation. Also, they might be very polite and caring but suddenly react abruptly when something that they don’t like happens. These are very subtle signs that you are dealing with someone who might not be entirely forthcoming. But the red flags get worse when you’re dealing with someone who is jealous and possessive. This can begin with incessant text messages and calls. It’s a progressive matter; they start off by increasing the number of calls and texts until you find that they are controlling everything you do. Eventually, they expect a tally and report of all the things you do. In addition, a manipulative partner will strive to find out things which are negative, embarrassing or even traumatic about your past. Then, they will use that every time they can. For instance, a manipulator may use their partner’s weight as a means of shaming. They will use this to coax their partner to comply; after all, “no one will love you as much as I do.” These types of statements are a clear indication that there is a manipulation attempt. These red flags are important to keep in mind as they can quickly degenerate into an abusive relationship. Highly skilled manipulators will make the transition so subtle that the victim won’t even notice the relationship is degrading to that level. In the end, all the victim can feel is the effects of the abuse. How to Know You Are Being Targeted It can be hard to know if you are being targeted by a manipulator. Perhaps the easiest way to go about this is to confront the manipulator. If you happen to run into someone who is overly friendly, then this ought to be a red flag for you. Also, if you happen to be surrounded by people who only remember you every time they need something from you, then you know you’re definitely being targeted. Unless you know a person well, it’s always a good rule of thumb to keep an eye out on everyone. While this may seem like paranoid behavior, the fact of the matter is if you are able to be alert, the chances of being nabbed by manipulators are rather slim. Here are some practical tips: e Be wary of overly friendly strangers e Watch for offers and deals that are “too good to be true” e Keep an eye out for sudden mood swings e Watch out for contradicting behavior and words e Pay attention to the moment in which people approach you e Avoid responding to unsolicited advice These situations are all indicative of a manipulator trying to “test” you. If they find that you are responsive, then they may feel compelled to continue their advances until you give in to what they want. In the end, it’s usually best to just get away from these people. You may never have to openly engage them; all you may have to do is just move away from them. How to Deal with a Manipulator If you happen to find yourself dealing with a manipulator, here are three very important steps which you can take to help you better deal with this type of individual. 1. Try your best to get away from the situation. While there are circumstances in which getting away from a manipulator may be virtually impossible, it is the most recommended course of action to get away from them as far as possible. This will take away their opportunities to manipulate you. Moreover, if you can completely extricate yourself from a situation (such as finding a new job), then all the better. 2. Find out what they are using to manipulate you and then take it away from them. If you can identify what they are using against you, then you will be able to take that weapon away from them. In fact, you may even be able to use it against them. That will be a clear indicator to the manipulator that they can’t have their way with you any longer. 3. Know your rights. If you happen to be in an abusive relationship or situation, you have the right to seek help. This can be any form of help that may be available to you, but you must act on it. If you know you are being affected by a manipulative and even abusive person, but fail to say anything about it, you may never get the help you need. So, it’s important to speak up. 4. Avoid the blame game. Do not think for a second that this situation is your fault. Also, there is no need to blame the manipulator even though they are responsible for their actions. When you play the blame game, you are hurting yourself by making it seem that you are directly, or indirectly, responsible for what’s happened. So, even if you are the victim, it’s not your fault that this has happened to you. By the same token, the manipulator is not at fault for being a manipulator. However, they are responsible for their actions. . Know when to quit. If you choose to confront the manipulator, you need to know when you may need to get away from them. There is only so much energy you can spend on a person like this. Oftentimes, dealing with a manipulator becomes a war of attrition. So, your determination to win that war may leave you more spent, both physically and emotionally, than what you stand to gain. Toxic Relationships It’s also important to keep an eye out for toxic relationships. Such relationships can be defined as those that hurt you in one manner or another. When you are in a toxic relationship, you don’t feel fulfilled. In fact, it’s quite the opposite. You end up feeling hurt, fatigued and even confused about the nature of the relationship. Consider this situation: You are part of a social group in which your “friends” always pick you thereby making you the butt of all the jokes. This type of relationship does not fulfill your social needs. Rather, it makes you feel terrible about yourself. The same goes for family relationships. There are times when family dynamics are so toxic and dysfunctional that you don’t have any kind of semblance to what a normal family would be. All you have is a collection of patterns and behaviors that are designed to bring you down and even make you feel bad about yourself. When you recognize that you are in a toxic relationship, the only way around it is to get out. However, this can be really tough, for instance, when you are in a toxic marriage. Divorce is certainly an option but the cost of it may be very high. However, you need to assess if the price you are paying by staying in the relationship may be higher than the toll it would take on you to divorce. At the end of the day, you need to assess whether a relationship is worth keeping. Of course, it will never make sense for you to stay in a toxic relationship especially if it’s leaving you spent and fatigued. Relationships ought to bring out the best in all parties involved. So, if you find yourself in a toxic relationship, it’s imperative to assess your priorities and determine if this relationship really is worth keeping. Chapter 6: Understanding Dark Persuasion how we interact with others, leaning in to persuade people to keep talking while ignoring them in hopes that they will be persuaded to go away. We persuade others to help by asking them and pleading our case, or we persuade people to do something through suggesting it. What makes persuasion dark versus regular persuasion, and how does dark persuasion work? If you want to understand why dark persuasion is so manipulative, you must first understand what it entails, as well as how it differs from harmless persuasion. per happens everywhere in day to day life. It can be seen in Defining Dark Persuasion At its simplest, persuasion is the act of coaxing or influencing someone into doing or believing something that they did not do or believe prior. Think of asking someone to do something that would never have occurred to them before. Perhaps you ask your partner to help you carry something because it is too heavy, and your partner has not yet offered help. If your partner then decides to carry something for you, you have successfully persuaded them. There is nothing inherently manipulative or wrong about doing this—you are simply asking for help and your partner obliges. Dark persuasion, then, adds a level of darkness. The propensity for darkness is the propensity to doing things for one’s own selfish interest with no regard of what it may or may not do to those around the manipulator. They do not care if people get hurt, betrayed, or upset. The only thing that matters to people who have a propensity for darkness or dark psychology is that one’s own wants and needs are met. Taking those two definitions, of darkness and of persuasion, you can then infer that dark persuasion is the art of influencing people to act in a way that is primarily or only beneficial to the manipulator with no regard for those being manipulated. Anything that the manipulator attempts to get from others is selfishly motivated. This selfishness, this darkness, is what makes dark persuasion so dangerous or harmful to others. Persuasion vs. Dark Persuasion If persuasion is acceptable, but dark persuasion is harmful, what is the real difference, you may ask. The difference lies in the intention. Persuasion, by and large, does not seek to inflict harm, and if anything, often seeks to better both the person doing the persuading and the person being persuaded. Oftentimes when trying to persuade someone, you are doing so because you believe it would be better, and this is from a good spot, seeking to benefit the other person as well. You are not trying to convince the other person to do something for your own benefit, and only your own benefit. Ultimately, the one sided selfishness is what differentiates the two from each other. Persuasion is not necessary but can be, selfish, but dark persuasion always is. Dark persuasion is almost always one sided, though the other person may believe there is some sort of benefit to him or her as well. In contrast, persuasion often seeks to balance benefits of all involved, attempting to spread as much good as possible. All parties involved in normal persuasion usually benefit in some way, shape, or form, but only the manipulator benefits in dark persuasion. Dark persuasion does not concern itself with morality, whereas persuasion does. The dark persuader does not care about right or wrong, but the persuader does. How Dark Persuasion Works Persuasion, and therefore dark persuasion, works through seven elements. These elements enable you to influence other people, no matter whether you seek to genuinely persuade someone with the best of intentions or you wish to darkly persuade someone into the behavior you know they would not necessarily care for. Understanding these seven elements is crucial to understanding exactly how to persuade others. Reciprocity Reciprocity is the idea that when someone helps or gives you something, you should return the favor. Even if it is as simple as someone smiling at you, you should smile back. No matter how big or small, the favor should be returned. This typically works in everyone’s favor when everyone reciprocates, because everyone sees benefits. If Alice asks Brenda for help moving furniture in exchange for homemade cookies and Brenda agrees to do so, the next time that Brenda needs help with something, Alice is going to be more likely to volunteer or agree to help. We inherently want to help others who help us; it is part of our wiring as a social species. However, this idea of reciprocity also applies in dark persuasion. If you seek to tap into dark persuasion, you are going to seek to create a sense of obligation in your target. You will do something for the other person with the intent of cashing in on the favor you feel you are owed. Many people are likely to give in to this notion, as well, and will oftentimes, even if begrudgingly, attempt to reciprocate. The idea with dark manipulation is to offer a small favor, typically something that does not take much of your time or energy, and then shortly after, request a favor in return. The shorter the time between you doing a favor and asking for a favor, the more likely it is that the answer will be yes, even with favors that are exponentially larger. For example, if you offer to cover your friend’s coffee, insisting it is no big deal when you know that he is struggling with money while you are out, you can turn around and ask your friend to help you by babysitting all evening while you go out on a date with your spouse. The reciprocity is not even between the two—all you did was buy a cheap coffee, but you are asking your friend to give up several hours in return. Say your date is set to last four hours, and you spent $3.50 on the coffee: This is essentially paying your friend the equivalent of $0.88/hour if you were to calculate out work for pay. This may sound like a fantastic price to pay for childcare for you, but your friend ends up caring for your children for well below minimum wage, and is honestly, probably at a loss after factoring in food that the children will inevitably ask for during a four hour window. At this point, your friend, who is already struggling to make ends meet, actually lost some money in return for drinking a cheap mocha from a café. Consistency and Commitment Consistency is important within persuasion because of three key factors: It is valued, creates a schedule that can be used to manage all of one’s many responsibilities, and it can simplify situations that are otherwise difficult to juggle due to having a routine. This means that consistency, in effect, makes people’s daily tasks more streamlined. People are able to get through everything easier when they have a set routine that enables them to meet all of their responsibilities that has proven effective in the past. The consistency in routine allows for reliability as well. Someone who is consistent is typically also quite reliable because of his or her routine. Therefore, someone who is consistent becomes easy to persuade. One that person has agreed to do something for you, you can be certain they will follow through due to their own skills at self motivating to remain consistent. In dark persuasion, you can take this to mean that once someone who is consistent has said they will do something, they will motivate themselves to do so, even if, halfway through, they realize that it is something that they have no desire to do, or is something that does not quite line up with their own belief systems. Going hand in hand with consistency comes commitment. Those who are consistent typically follow through with commitments no matter what. They self motivate to get the job done due to their consistency. Those who have proven themselves consistent typically will continue to follow that pattern, believing remaining consistent and reliable is integral to which they are as a person. This self motivation is, in essence, a form of self persuasion. By simply getting a commitment, you may not even have to do the persuasion part; the other person will do the work for you. This means that once you bind this person to do something, it will almost absolutely happen. Commitments are valued and not taken lightly. Even if you do find that the other person is balking at the agreement and seeming as though he or she may back out of the arrangement, appealing to that commitment, reminding the other person that they had promised or otherwise committed him or herself to completing the commitment is often enough to keep them in line. Within dark persuasion, then, by earning a commission, particularly from someone consistent, you are able to then ensure that you do not have to work hard to hold the other person accountable. Ultimately, those interested in dark persuasion and covert manipulation seek to get results with the least amount of effort, so by getting someone that you know is consistent and dedicated to meeting commitments, you are able to lessen your workload. You know that you are not likely to need to nag at the other person to follow through, which means you do not have to do as much follow up work. Social Proof Social proof is, in essence, herd mentality. It is the idea that people feel the constraints of social pressure demanding that they act in a certain way. It is the feeling of being obligated to do something simply because society dictates that is the way things are done, particularly in situations in which someone is unfamiliar. When unsure about the situation, people tend to follow the lead of those around them, feeling the pressure to conform. They assume that those around them, who seem to be moving around seamlessly, know what is supposed to be done, and therefore decide to mimic them in hopes of behaving appropriately. This phenomenon is even more pronounced when the individual who is unsure about the situation is able to closely relate to those who are acting, to whom the individual decides to conform. This can be seen in various experiments. In one such experiment, researchers joined a charity campaign that went door to door to get donations. When the list of donators had more names on it, the people being asked to donate were typically more likely to donate, particularly when the person being solicited recognized names on the donor list as being known neighbors, friends, or peers. This relates to persuasion because it involves what is seen as horizontal rather than vertical; at its core, this means that people are more likely to be influenced by their peers than their superiors. They are more likely to adopt the behaviors of people they identify with than those who have power. Within dark persuasion, then, this concept could be used to influence people to conform. If the predator were to fabricate a list of donators, for example, he would be able to better convince people to donate. Likewise, the predator could fabricate situations in which the target is alongside people who are acting the way the predator desires, allowing for the predator to influence the target’s actions without it ever becoming obvious. Likable Imagine that two people, one who you like, and the others who you do not, ask you to do the same thing. Who do you help, if anyone? The most likely answer is that you will help the person you like. People tend to agree to help people they like and are far more likely to say yes if they like the person attempting to persuade them. The question, then, is who do people like? How do people decide who the like and dislike? Ultimately, the answer involves three factors that determine how likable someone is to us: e People with whom we can identify closely e People who complement or flatter us e People who are willing to cooperate in order to attain similar, mutual goals or outcomes Understanding what people like and naturally gravitate toward gives manipulators an idea of how to act in order to get inside a desired target’s inner circle. The manipulator learns that, in order to get a yes, he or she should aim to be relatable, compliment the target, and identify common goals, even if those common goals are falsified by the manipulator to create some sort of semblance of a connection. Once those three standards have been met, the dark persuader is far more likely to get desired results when asking someone to do something. The persuader has tapped into unconscious biases and tendencies in order to get desired results. Authority By and large, people defer to authority and are more likely to do whatever someone asks if they see clear signs of authority presented to them. For example, a person may listen to what a nurse has to say about care at home, but may not follow through. If that same person were told the same thing by a doctor whose lab coat declared them the head of the ER department, however, they would be far more likely to do as told. This is because the person unconsciously defers to higher authorities. In the person’s mind, the nurse may not be as worthy of being an authority as the doctor who is the head of the emergency room, even though the information provided is exactly the same. In terms of being able to persuade others, then, this implies that it is important to cue that the predator is an authority in some way. You can convince people to buy products if you have a business degree hanging on the wall, and you can sway someone by using your credentials with your name on nameplates, business cards, and other identifying items. Consider if someone talked to you about what you should do with your insurance on your car—would you be more inclined to listen to a random person in casual clothes, or someone wearing a shirt emblazoned with the logo of a popular, well known insurance company? The answer is the one who has identified themselves as a representative of an insurance company. You would assume they are an authority on the product if their shirt marks them as someone involved with the insurance business. The dark persuaders, then, could take this a step further. Either through misrepresenting experience, or even lying about credentials, they are able to be seen as more reliable. They may discuss some reason they have more working knowledge over a situation, and because of that, they should be seen as a default authority on the matter. Scarcity People always want what they cannot have. Because oftentimes, people see the proverbial grass is greener on the other side, by imposing scarcity on a product, demand goes up. If an unpopular item is being removed from a menu, people will suddenly want it more, until it is gone, at which point, that item that never sold well in the first place is suddenly missed. Many restaurants follow similar structures, offering items for a limited time only, although realistically, they would be able to produce enough to meet demand if they chose to. Hype for the item is built through the exclusive nature of it—because it is limited, more people want to try it before they lose the opportunity forever. When it comes to persuading others, then, keeping scarcity in mind can be particularly useful. Not only should a predator make sure to tout benefits toward what people can gain by going along with the predator’s plan, but also what may be lost if the plan is not followed. Emphasizing the temporary nature of the deal, as well as what the loss of the deal will entail. People will be far more likely to go along with the plan if they feel like they stand to lose something if they do not do it. Chapter 7: Dark Persuasion Methods hen people attempt to give meaning to the concept of persuasion, their answers always come in different forms. While some may set their minds on the advertisements and commercials that are everywhere in modern society, urging one to patronize a certain product or service over another, others’ minds fall back to the politicians that try to change the minds of voters just to get one more vote at the polls. Both examples are correct as they are messages aimed at changing the perception of the subject. The point of diversion between normal persuasion and dark persuasion is that dark persuasion does not always have a moral justification. While a normal persuader may try to persuade someone for that person's own good, a dark persuader does so with motivations that aren't always good for the other person. They try to get a full grasp of understanding of the person they wish to persuade, and they take pains to do so because they know what the biggest motivation is. While persuasion always has moral implications, a dark persuader does not concern themselves with these implications. In fact, they are aware of them but choose to place their eyes on their objective(s) instead. Persuasion is a psychological phenomenon in the everyday life of a human being. It is either that you are the one trying to persuade someone else or you are being persuaded. What makes the difference between dark and normal is the motivation behind it. In mass media, politics, advertising and legal decisions, persuasion comes into play all the time. The outcome of practicing it in these fields is determined by ways of persuasion which will influence the subject of persuasion. There are some obvious and very crucial differences between persuasion and other types of mind control such as brainwashing and hypnosis. While these two require that the subject should be isolated in order to change their minds and identity, persuasion does not also require isolation. In order to get to the goal, manipulation is used on one person. Although persuasion can also be done on a single subject in order to get them to change their minds, there is also a possibility of using it on a large scale to change the minds of a whole group or even an entire society. For this reason, persuasion be a more effective mind control technique and perhaps more dangerous because it can change the minds of many people at the same time instead of the mind of just one person at a time. There are several people that make the mistake of thinking they have an immunity to the effects of persuasion because they are of the opinion that they will always be able to see every sales pitch that comes their way. They believe they will always be able to use logic to get a grasp of what is going on and then find a logical conclusion to it. Thanks to the fact that people are not always going to fall for everything they hear if they use logic, this may be true. It is also possible to avoid persuasion because the argument does not augur well with the person's beliefs no matter the strength of the argument. However, there are people who know how to use persuasive messages to encourage people to patronize the latest gadgets or products in the market. This act of persuasion is very subtle so the subject will not always identify it, so it is going to be quite hard for them to always be able to form an opinion about the information they are going to get. Every time persuasion is mentioned, it is very likely that one thinks of it in a bad light. This is because they tend to automatically think of a conman or salesman who is always trying to get them to change their perspective and who will eventually push them until this change is achieved. While dark persuasion is prominent in sales and conning practices, there are also ways that persuasion can be used for good, like in diplomatic relations between international bodies or in public service campaigns. The difference only lies in the way the process of persuasion is brought to play. Dark Persuasion Techniques When a person is willing to change the mind of their subject by persuading them to do something that is contrary to their initial state of mind, the persuader is going to have some well laid out techniques to help them achieve their goals. Each day that passes, the target is going to face different types of persuasion. For food makers, their goal will be to get their target to try out their new recipes or have them stick to the old ones, while studios will flash their latest blockbuster movies on the faces of their targets. Whatever the case may be or whatever product they are selling, their main aim is to make more sales and that is why they are trying to persuade you. They really couldn’t care less about how this will impact you and this is the reason why they must be very careful and skilled in the art of subtle persuasion to ensure that they do not tip you off or get you agitated. Since there are also many other brands trying to persuade you, they must find a unique way to impress their views on you. Due to the influence of persuasion on a wide range of people, the techniques used in it have been a subject of study for many years, dating back to ancient times. This is because influence is a very useful tool in the hands of a wide range of people. Starting from the early 20th century, the formal study of these techniques began to grow. Remember that the goal of trying to persuade people is to push a persuasive argument on an audience and have them convinced. They will then internalize this message and adopt it as their new attitude or even way of life. For this reason, there is a great need to discover the most successful persuasion techniques. Create a Need This is one of the most fruitful ways of getting a person to change their point of view or way of life. The person that is trying to persuade a target will either create a need or capitalize on a need that the subject already has. If this is done in a proper way, it has the potential of appealing a great deal to the target. What this means is that in order to be successful, the persuader must appeal to the needs that are of more importance to the target. This may be their need to fulfil their dreams or of boosting their self esteem. It may also be their want for love, shelter or food. This method will always work out well because there is no way the subject is not going to need any of these things, or in need of anything at all for that matter. Since there is no way the target isn’t going to have dreams and aspirations, the persuader will only have to find ways to make the victim understand how they can easily help the victim achieve those dreams. The persuader may also tell their target that the target will realize their dreams if they make certain alterations to their beliefs or perspective. Doing this, according to the persuader, will give the target a higher chance of achieving success. For example, a young man that wants to get intimate with a lady may tell her that he will help her improve her grades and finally make her parents proud by getting an A, but only if she becomes friends with him. While this lady may think that she has finally found the redemption she needs, the truth is that the young man isn’t very interested in how well she performs in school, her academics are only a bait for getting access to sex. Appealing to Social Needs The other technique that the persuader can use is identifying the target's social needs. While this may not yield as many results and the target's primary needs will, it is still an important tool in the hands of the persuader. There are people who are naturally drawn to crowds and desire to be wanted. They always want to have certain items, not because they need them but because it comes with certain prestige that makes them feel as though they belong to a higher class. The notion of appealing to the target's social needs is what is obtainable through many TV commercials where viewers are encouraged to buy a product so that they will not be “left behind.” When they can identify and appeal to the social needs of the target, the result is they are able to reach a new area of the target's interest. Making Use of Loaded Words and Images When a person is trying to persuade someone else, they must be careful with their choice of words as words can make all the difference. While there are many ways to say a thing, one way of saying it may be more potent than the other. When it has to do with persuasion, one of the most important things is knowing how to say the right thing at the right time. Words are always the most important tools in communication and knowing the right call to action words. Dark persuasion is one of the most powerful concepts of dark psychology, but sadly it is always overlooked and underestimated. This may be because, unlike the other methods of mind control, persuasion leaves the target with a choice. In the other mind control methods, the target is forced into submission and sometimes this is done by putting them in isolation so that at the end, they do not have any say in the outcome of the process. When it comes to persuasion, the chips are laid bare (although with an ulterior motive in dark persuasion) so that the target is left to make the decision that they think will suit them best. Chapter 8: What is NLP? (neuro) and language (linguistic) in a systemic way and the scripts N | euro Linguistic Programming has to do with the study of thoughts that run the life of an individual (programming). It deals with the understanding and the development of the mind and the entire understanding of the language of the mind in relation to the way it is designed to function and the ways in which it is molded by the personal experiences of an individual. It is simply a study of a person's subjective reality. A proper understanding of the language of the mind influences every aspect of a person’s life from his relationship with others to his communication skills with friends and clients to the general outcome of a person’s life. It is a holistic study that puts the spirit, body, past and present of an individual into consideration. As homo sapiens who are gifted with the ability to think, it is presumed that our most important function is the thought or the thinking function. NLP, however, brings one to the understanding of the fact that no thought process exists in a vacuum, as they are a product of a person's perspective. It has a presupposition of perception as reality and it holds that the things, we think are colored by the way we think. For different individuals there are different ways of thinking and interpreting reality. What NLP does is assist in the understanding of these various representational systems to help each person narrow down his own system. It helps in the understanding of the three different types of thinking patterns which are: e Visual: deals with both pictures and visual metaphors. e Auditory: sound (hearing). e Kinesthetic: deals with the five senses, as well as gut feelings. In NLP, a person is thought to take absolute control of his mind and ultimately his life. Unlike what is obtainable in psychoanalysis, which places its focus on “why,” NLP presents a more practical approach with its focus on the “how.” How NLP Works If you are just coming across this topic for the first time, NLP may appear or seem like magic or hypnosis. When a person is undergoing therapy, this topic digs deep into the unconscious mind of the patient and filters through different layers of beliefs and the person's approach or perception of life to deduce the early childhood experiences that are responsible for a behavioral pattern. In NLP, it is believed that everyone has the resources that are needed for positive changes in their own lives. The technique adopted here is meant to help in facilitating these changes. Usually, when NLP is taught, it is done in a pyramidal structure. However, the most advanced techniques are left for those multi thousand dollar seminars. An attempt to explain this complicated subject is to state that the NLPer (as those who use NLP will often call themselves) is always paying keen attention to the person they are working on/with. Usually, there is a large majority of NLPers that are therapists and they are very likely to be well meaning people. They achieve their aims by paying attention to those subtle cues like the movement of the eyes, flushing of the skin, dilation of the pupil and subtle nervous tics. It is easy for an NLP user to quickly determine the following: e The side of the brain that the person uses predominantly. e The sense (smell, sight, etc.) that is more dominant in a person’s brain. e ‘The way the person’s brain stores and makes use of information (the NLPer can deduce all this from the person’s eye movement). e When they are telling a lie or concocting information. When the NLP user has successfully gathered all this information, they begin to mimic the client in a slow and subtle manner by not only taking on their body language, but also by imitating their speech and mannerisms, so that they begin to talk with the language patterns that are aimed at targeting the primary senses of the client. They will typically fake the social cues that will easily make someone let their guard down so that they become very open and suggestible. For example, when a person’s sense of sight is their most dominant sense, the NLPer will use a language that is very laden with visual metaphors to speak with them. They will say things like: “do you see what I am talking about?” or “why not look at it this way?” For a person that has a more dominant sense of hearing, he will be approached with an auditory language like: “listen to me” or “I can hear where you’re coming from.” To create a rapport, the NLPer mirrors the body language and the linguistic patterns of the other person. This rapport is a mental and physiological state which a human being gets into when they lose guard of their social senses. It is done when they begin to feel like the other person who they are conversing with is just like them. Once the NLPer have achieved this rapport, they will take charge of the interaction by leading it in a mild and subtle manner. Thanks to the fact that they have already mirrored the other person, they will now begin to make some subtle changes in order to gain a certain influence on the behavior of the person. This is also combined with some similar subtle language patterns which lead to questions and a whole phase of some other techniques. At this point, the NLPer will be able to tweak and twist the person to whichever direction they so desire. This only happens if the other person can’t deduce that there is something going on because they assume everything that is occurring is happening organically or that they have given consent to everything. What this means is that it is quite hard to make use of NLP to get other people to act out of character, but it can be used to get a person to give responses within their normal range of character. This may come in the form of getting them to donate to a charitable cause, or finally making the decision they had been putting off or getting them to go home with you for the night if they had considered it at some previous point. At this point, what the NLP user seeks to do may be to either elicit or anchor. When they are eliciting, they make use of both leading and language to get the person to an emotional state of say, sadness. Once they can elicit this state, they can then lead it on with a physical cue by touching the other person's shoulder for example. According to theory, whenever the NLP user touches the person's shoulder in the same manner, the same emotional state will resurface if they do it again. However, this is only made possible by the successful conditioning of the other person. When undergoing NLP therapy, it is very possible for the therapist to adopt a content free approach, which means the therapist can work effectively without taking a critical look at the problem or without even knowing about the problem at all. This means that there is room for privacy for the client as the therapist does not really need to be told about whichever event took place or whatever issue happened in the past. Also, prior to the commencement of the therapy, there is an agreement which ensures that the therapist cannot disclose any information, hence the interaction between the therapist and the client remains confidential. In NLP, there is the belief in the need for the perfection of the nature of human creation, so every client is encouraged to recognize the sensitivity of the senses and make use of them in responding to specific problems. As a matter of fact, NLP also holds the belief that it is possible for the mind to find cures to diseases and sicknesses. The techniques employed by NLP have to do with a noninvasive, medicine free therapy that enables the client to find out new ways of handling emotional issues such as low self esteem, lack of confidence, anxiety and destructive relationship patterns. It is also a successful tool in effective bereavement counselling. With its roots in the field of behavioral science, which was developed by Skinner, Pavlov and Thorndike, NLP makes use of the combination physiology and the unconscious mind to bring about change in the thought process and ultimately the behavior of a person. The Importance of NLP Neuro Linguistic Programming is not only necessary for the understanding of a person's being, but it also helps in the understanding of the way an individual is. It helps a person to get deep into the root cause of the problem, as well as the foundation of their being. Here are some other reasons why NLP is important: e It helps people take responsibility for the things that they feel they may not be able to control. With the help of NLP, it is possible for a person to change the way they react to events of the past and have a certain level of control over their future. e It is very important for people to be aware of the body language of the members of their inner circle, as well as those who they seek to do business with. With NLP, it is possible to make use of language with both control and purpose, and with this it is possible to have control over your life. Remember, you cannot expect to make the same mistakes using the same mindset and hope to get different results. During an NLP session, the focus is placed entirely on the client as they are made the subject. This helps a lot because at the point where a person can deal with his or herself as a person, they gain more clarity into his or her dealings with other people. e It helps to improve finance, sales performance, marriage, health issues, parenting, customer service and every other aspect and phase of life. This is because it helps in the holistic improvement of an individual and when a person is whole, his interactions and relationship with himself and other people become whole as well. e It assists in targeting your beliefs, thoughts and values and helps with the targeting of a person’s brain functions, as well as developing certain behaviors. It also shapes the way these behaviors metamorphoses into habits and how the habits change to actions which in turn comes as results. NLP is applicable in different vocations and professions. This is a tool that is very important in the mastery of sales, personal development experts and self help, teaching, communication, parenting and other facets of life. Chapter 9: Toxic Relationships oughly speaking, a toxic relationship is any kind of relationship that causes harm to at least one of the parties involved. This is an important distinction to make as some toxic relationships affect only one of the parties (there needs to be at least two parties involved), or they may hurt all of the parties involved. The type of harm that occurs in this kind of relationship can be physical, emotional, or both. Most of the time, one type of harm is more prevalent than the other. In some cases, there may be a combination of both. Be that as it may, a toxic relationship will inflict harm on the parties involved in such a manner that it can leave lasting effects. Consider this example: In a marriage, one spouse is physically abusive to the other. The victim generally puts up with the abuse for any number of reasons. For argument’s sake, let’s assume that the victim does not leave the relationship out of fear. As such, the victimizer takes full advantage of this and looks to further submit their victim. In the end, the physical harm endured by the victim may lead to grave consequences such as death and serious bodily injury. In this example, one of the parties is the recipient of the abuse and thereby bears the brunt of the harm. The victimizer may suffer from emotional distress as a result of their action. For instance, the victimizer may feel guilty after inflicting the abuse upon their spouse, though such cases aren’t always the norm. Now, let’s consider a situation in which both of the spouses are in a toxic relationship and in which both suffer harm. In this scenario, there is no physical harm inflicted upon any of the spouses, but rather it is emotional harm. Both spouses are verbally abusive to one another. They frequently engage in shouting matches in which they say very nasty things to each other. The end result is emotional distress beyond anything either spouse has experienced. In this case, both parties play a dual role; that is, victim and victimizer. This naturally leads to a breakdown in the relationship which, most of the time, is irreparable. This means that the pattern of abuse will continue until the relationship itself ends. However, both partners may be so set in their ways that the thought of ending the relationship may seem inconceivable to them. The end result may be a pattern of abuse that lasts for years on end. How to Recognize a Toxic Relationship Generally speaking, any time you are in a relationship, whether it’s romantic, professional, family or friendship, and you are suffering any type of harm, that is, you are hurt in any way, at least on a consistent basis, then you are most likely in a toxic relationship. Some of the signs may be too subtle to tell. But if you consistently feel bad, in any way, then you may have to take a closer look at your relationship. Perhaps things aren’t so bad on the surface, but beneath the visible surface, there may lie a deep pattern of abuse. Let’s consider your workplace. If you find yourself working with colleagues who drag you down rather than spurring you to be your best, then you are most likely in a toxic workplace environment. If you add to that a boss who is demanding, overbearing and domineering, then you might as well get a new job. Think about it in this manner. If you get home absolutely spent at the end of your workday; if you feel like you have run a marathon; if you feel that you are emotionally drained, every single day, then you might very well be the victim of toxic relationships. Now, it’s one thing to have a tough job which is demanding and requires a high degree of physical and emotional conditioning. You can tell the difference because you feel that your job gives you a sense of purpose beyond the paycheck. But if you would rather go through a root canal rather than go to work, then it’s a safe bet that you are not in an ideal environment. Another telltale sign that you are in a toxic relationship is when you feel that you are giving more than you are getting. While this may be the manifestation of unfulfilled wishes (for instance, a narcissist may feel that they are not getting what they want in a relationship), an honest assessment of both your actions and those of the other parties may reveal that you are in a toxic relationship. It could very well be that others are simply taking advantage of you. Furthermore, toxic relationships are manifest when there is a clear benefit for one party as compared to other parties. For example, parents clearly derive a benefit from their children while the children themselves don’t receive the love and attention they need. This is generally seen in child stars. The parents reap the benefits of their child’s success while the child is neglected and forced to work. On the whole, toxic relationships are fairly obvious once you begin to peel back the onion. This assessment begins when you see that you are hurt in some manner, or you are not receiving any kind of benefit in the relationship. Moreover, if there is any kind of physical harm in a relationship, then it’s time to end it. Types of Toxic Relationships While the term “toxic relationship” tends to be seen as an umbrella term encompassing any kind of harmful relationship, the fact is that there are multiple variants of this type of relationship. The difference generally lies in the way the relationship is set up. So, there are relationships that are focused more on a romantic interest, whereas others are focused more on a professional setting. Toxic Romantic Relationships This type of toxic relationship can take on any number of facets. It is the only one we are going to explore in isolation as it is the one which is the most vulnerable to degenerating into a toxic, abusive interaction among both parties. In general terms, toxic romantic relationships tend to be broken from the beginning. As such, the foundations of the relationship are set up in such a way that there is hardly any semblance of what a normal romantic relationship would like. In theory, romantic relationships involve two individuals who profess affection and fondness for one another. This means that there is an affinity between both of them in such a way that they commit their time and energy to caring for each other. If a relationship is set up under those pretenses, then the chance of it surviving over time is far greater than if they are set up under any other type of pretenses. The situation now shifts dramatically when one of the parties in the relationship enters it with a hidden agenda. When this occurs, the relationship may be broken from the beginning. Then, there is the case in which a relationship deteriorates over time thereby leading to its toxicity. Roughly speaking, one, or both, parties in the relationship are somehow hurt by the dynamic that ensues. When this happens, resentment brews leading to potential animosity between the parties. At this point, the relationship may be beyond repair. In fact, the only solution may be to break up and move on. The situation gets further compounded when there is some type of physical harm involved. Natural, physical harm is extremely difficult to deal with as it could lead to serious injury or even death. That’s why it’s important to note that abuse in a romantic relationship can range from verbal aggression to physical harm. Everything that happens in between can be a sign that the victimizer, whether acting consciously or unconsciously, is looking to extract as much benefit for themselves as possible. As a result, the manifestation of blackmail, gaslighting, guilt or blame can be evident. As the abuse deepens, one or several of these phenomena may emerge. The victim may be left broken with their self esteem shattered in a million pieces. The victimizer may end up resenting themselves though unable to break the pattern that they have become accustomed to. Dependence Dependence is especially toxic when the victim is the party who sustains the dependency of the victimizer. To clearly exemplify this, think about a drug addict or alcoholic. The addict becomes dependent on their spouse, parents, siblings or friends especially when they are under the influence. When addiction takes over a person’s life, they may be unable to function in a traditional social context. For instance, they may depend on financial support as they are unable to work. If we assume an adult child who is financially dependent on their parents, the addiction may perpetuate this dependency on the parents. The relationship then becomes toxic for the parents especially if they are older and no longer able to work. In addition, the emotional toll that such a relationship can take on a person is truly exhausting. Dependence can also be seen at an emotional level. For instance, a person is completely dependent on their partner’s attention and validation. In this case, the dependent individual may be unable to function properly without having the full attention of their partner. This can be seen in jealous types (regardless of whether they are male or female). The jealous types will strive to control their partner’s every move so that they can feel safe and secure. Naturally, the relationship becomes toxic for the victim as they tend to feel suffocated and smothered by the relentless desire for attention from their partner. Narcissism This is one of the most toxic relationships you can be in. A narcissist will generally stop at nothing when looking to take full control over their partner’s life, or in the case of narcissistic parents, their children’s lives. Let’s explore narcissistic parents a bit further. Narcissistic parents are the kind that seek to control everything about their children’s lives. They will be eternally vigilant and overprotective. This attitude is not the product of genuine concern for their children’s wellbeing. Rather, it is a manifestation of their own insecurities. As a result, they need to be in full control of their children’s lives so that they can feel more at ease. Furthermore, narcissistic parents have a tendency to live vicariously through their children. This means that these types of parents will push their children into activities and areas in which they, the parents, failed in their own lives. As such, the parents are looking to realize their own dreams through their children. Hence, the support that these types of parents put into their children’s development is done more out of the desire to realize their own dreams rather than pursuing their children’s wishes and desires. Lastly, dealing with a narcissistic boss can be a terrible experience. A narcissistic boss is generally a micromanager and very slow to delegate any kind of responsibility or decision making power to anyone else. Thus, they are totally committed to supervising everything that is done while centralizing all decisions. Needless to say, this can be extremely frustrating while leaving employees with a profound sense of powerlessness. In the end, these types of bosses manage to alienate their employees to the point where they may no longer care about the work they are doing. The boss, on their end, may end up feeling completely exhausted, both physically and emotionally, as all of their energy is spent on trying to maintain control of everything around them. This type of relationship is completely toxic for all of those involved. Manipulation Manipulation in relationships can be subtle or quite overt. In some cases, manipulation occurs when the manipulator has a hidden agenda that they act upon. In other cases, the manipulator simply acts out instinctively without really being aware of what they are going to their victim. Regardless of the case, the manipulator uses their victim for whatever purpose suits them. In some of the most sordid cases, the manipulator may choose their victim out of sheer pleasure and enjoyment, that is, they take sadistic satisfaction in victimizing a vulnerable person. Manipulation can occur through blackmail, guilt, lying or even mind control techniques. The level of sophistication on the part of the manipulator may end up determining how well these techniques can work on their victim. Furthermore, when the victimizer gets bored or fulfills their purpose, the victim may very well be discarded. This is the type of attitude that manipulators with psychopathic tendencies might take. They may not have the slightest amount of compassion for their victim. As such, they will see their victims are disposable. One other thing about manipulation: when a victim becomes aware of the manipulation but does nothing to stop, they become complicit. In a manner of speaking, they become an enabler as they do not attempt to put an end to it. When this occurs, the victim may take pleasure in being victimized. This is a masochistic response that may evolve as a result of prolonged periods of exposure to the abuse and even torture. So, don’t be surprised if you happen to find people who actually enjoy being subjected to painful experiences. How to Avoid Toxic Relationships There are two ways of going about this: first, what to do when you are already in a toxic relationship, and second, how to avoid getting one in the first place. If you are in a toxic relationship, you need to assess how toxic the relationship really is. If you believe that it may be repaired, then it would be wise to talk with the other party to see if there is a possible resolution. However, if you feel that the relationship is seriously compromised, then you may need professional help in order to restore a healthy balance. On the other hand, if you believe that the relationship is beyond repair, then there may be no other way but out. Often, professional help may be of benefit, but repairing a toxic relationship requires the commitment of all parties involved. If any one of the partners is reluctant to work on the relationship, then there may be no solution to it. In addition, it is important to spot the red flags as they emerge. Here is a list of red flags to look out for: e Excessive control e Jealousy e Insecurity e Emotional dependence e Physical violence e Guilt e Hurtful comments e Passive aggressive attacks e Name calling e Constant blaming e Constant reminder of past mistakes Any of these red flags, should you spot them, ought to give you an indication that you might be in a toxic relationship. The sooner you spot them, the sooner you may be able to get out, or in the best of cases, repair the relationship. If you realize that you are, in fact, the manipulator, then you might be able to make amends and restore balance to your relationship. Chapter 10: Mirroring ave you ever sat in a restaurant and people watched? It can be quite amusing to sit back and watch all of the people out and about around you, attempting to identify how their relationships must be going by body language alone. Yes, it is quite possible to understand at the briefest glance at another how they get along. You can absolutely tell how much or how little people get along simply by watching them together and seeing how they naturally orient their bodies around each other. This simple skill is referred to as mirroring, and it is absolutely crucial if you want to be successful at influencing or persuading others. When you understand mirroring, you essentially have a built in system in which you can judge just how well people are likely to be willing to listen to you. You can tell if you are successful in developing rapport, and if you have not, you will be able to push the act of earning rapport along a little quicker. You can utilize mirroring in a wide range of ways that can absolutely be beneficial to you, and you can utilize it in ways that can be useful to others as well. What is Mirroring? First things first, you must learn what mirroring is. At the simplest, it is the human tendency to mirror what is happening around them when they feel a relationship to whatever it is that is around them. For example, if you look at an old married couple, they are likely to constantly be mirroring each other’s behaviors. It is essentially the ultimate culmination of empathy—the individuals are so bonded, so aware of each other and their behaviors, that they unconsciously mimic any behaviors that their partner does first. The two married people at the diner may both sip at their coffees at the same time as each other, or if one drinks, the other will follow shortly after. If one shifts in his seat, she will do so as well, always leaning to mirror the position her husband is in. If she brushes off something on her shoulder, he will unconsciously touch his shoulder as well. This act is known as mirroring, and it occurs in a wide range of circumstances. You do not necessarily have to be a married couple that has been together for decades for mirroring to be relevant, either—you can see it everywhere. The person interviewing you for a job may begin to mirror you when the interview is going well, or the person who thinks that you are attractive may mimic some of your behaviors as well. You can see these behaviors mimicked started quite early on in terms of how long people have been interacting as well—sometimes people will even hit it off right off the bat and begin mirroring each other, emphasizing the fact that they seemed to have clicked. Mirroring is essentially the ultimate form of flattery—it involves literally copying the other person because you like or love them so much. Children mirror their parents when learning how to behave in the world. Good friends often mirror each other. Salespeople wanting to win rapport, mirror people. No matter what the relationship is, if it is a positive one, there are likely mirroring behaviors, whether unconscious or not. Uses of Mirroring You may be wondering why something as simple as mimicry can actually be important to others, but it is actually one of the most fundamental parts of influence, persuasion, and manipulation. When you mirror someone, you can develop rapport. Rapport is essentially the measurement of your relationship with someone—if you have a good rapport with someone, you have developed some level of trust with them. The other person is likely to believe what you are saying if you develop rapport. However, if you have not yet developed rapport yet and you need the other person to listen to you, you can oftentimes artificially create that rapport through one simple task— mirroring. If you mirror the other person, you can essentially convince him to develop a rapport with you, whether it was something he wanted to develop on his own or whether you forced the point. By constantly mirroring the other person, you essentially send the signs to their brain that they need to like this person because this person is just like them. Remember the three key factors for likability? The first one was able to relate or identify with the other person. In this case, you are presenting yourself as easy to relate to simply because you want the other person to like you. With liking you comes rapport. With rapport comes trust, which you can use to convince the other person to buy cars, or do certain things that will benefit you. Building rapport even builds up the ability to be able to manipulate the other person—you need to be trustworthy for the other person to let you close enough to manipulate in the first place. How to Mirror Luckily for you, mirroring is quite easy to learn how to do. While it may seem awkward and unnatural at first, the more you practice it, the more natural it will become to you, and the more effective you can get at it. Remember, if you want to mirror someone, you will need to toe the line between too much and not enough. If you are too overt, the other person will catch on and will likely be more put off than convinced to like you. Take a look at these four steps so you can learn to mirror for yourself. Build up a Connection The first step when you are attempting to mirror someone is to start by building a connection somehow. If you do not feel the connection with the other person, they are not likely to be feeling a connection either. Keeping that in mind, you should begin to foster some sort of connection and rapport. This can be done with four simple steps on its own. e Fronting: This is the act of facing the other person entirely. You start with your body oriented toward them, directly facing the other person to give them your complete attention. e Eye contact: This is the tricky part—when you are making eye contact, you need to make sure that you get the right amount. e The triple nod: This does two things—it encourages the other person to keep speaking because the other person feels valued and listened to, and it makes the other person feel like you agree with them. It develops what is known as a yes set. The more you say yes, the more likely you are to develop a connection with the other person. e Fake it till you make it: At this point, you have spent a lot of time setting up the connection, and it is time for the moment of truth. You should imagine that the person is the most interesting in the world at that particular moment. You want to really believe that they are interesting to you. Then stop pretending—you should feel that they are actually interesting to you at this point. This is the birth of the connection you had been trying to establish. Pace and Volume Now, before you start mimicking their body language, start by paying attention to the other person’s vocal cues. You want to make sure you are speaking at the same speed as the other person. If they are a quick speaker, you should also speak quickly, and if they are a slower speaker, you should slow your own speaking pace down to match. From there, make sure you are also mimicking the volume. If they are louder, you should raise your own voice. If they are keeping their voice down, you should follow suit. These vocal cues are far easier to mimic undetected than the rest of the physical cues. The Punctuator Everyone has a punctuator they use for emphasis. It could be something like a hand gesture that is used every time they want to emphasize something, or it could be the way they raise their brows as they say the word they want to stress. No matter what the punctuator is, you should identify what it is and seek to mimic it at the moment. Now, oftentimes, this cue is entirely unconscious on the other person’s part, and as you begin to mimic it, the other person is likely to believe that you are on the same wavelength. This should really do it for you without making what you are doing obviously. The Moment of Truth Now, you are ready to test whether you have successfully built up the rapport you need. When you want to know if the other person has officially been connected to you, you should make some small action that is unrelated to what you are doing at that particular moment and see if the other person does it back. For example, if you are having a conversation about computers, you may reach up and rub your forehead for a split second. Watch and see if the other person also rubs at their forehead right after you. If they do, they have connected to you, and you can begin to move forward with your persuasive techniques. Chapter 11: Covert Manipulation overt emotional manipulation is something most people wish they never would become involved with, but by the time they realize they may be getting manipulated, the damage has already been done. It involves one person intentionally, systematically, and covertly removing as much power as possible from another person, instead of replacing it with control. The victim never knows it is happening, and the manipulator essentially gains near total control over the other person. When it is finally discovered, the individual who is being controlled realizes that he or she is lost—not realizing what has happened, confused about how their entire life has spiraled out of their own control and feeling as though they are stuck. What is Covert Emotional Manipulation? Covert emotional manipulation has three key parts: e Covert e Emotional e Manipulation Understanding all three of these parts will be necessary if you want to understand what happens within this type of manipulation. Before delving into how it is done or what techniques manipulators tend to prefer, you will first define all three of these key parts. Covert, at its simplest, means secret. It refers to how secretive the entire process is—the manipulator is able to install all of the strings necessary without detection, utilizing all sorts of methods that employ plausible deniability. This means that they do things that are intentionally ambiguous —they may be hurtful things, but when the victim calls the individual out on being so hurtful, the manipulator denies everything, claiming that the victim is far too sensitive about such things and needs to learn to relax a little. Emotional means that it will employ tactics whose success will hinge upon the ability to successfully use emotions. The emotions of choice that manipulators usually go for are fear and sadness, as both of these enable the manipulator to better control the victim. Essentially, the manipulator will cause the feeling of one of these emotions to use as a foundation for whatever behavior he may be attempting to manipulate or coerce out of the victim. Manipulation means that the manipulator is swaying the victim into doing something. The actions at that point are not done of the victim’s volition— there was some sort of coercion or force that occurred, whether through threats, fear, or anything else, and that allows for the manipulator to retain control. Essentially, with covert emotional manipulation, the manipulator is the puppet master, creating all sorts of invisible strings in the victim behind the scenes in ways that go entirely undetected. These strings allow for the emotional manipulation of the other person, which can then be used to the manipulator’s advantage as they extort, coerce, and force the victim into behaving to avoid intense emotional distress. How to Use Covert Emotional Manipulation When you want to use covert emotional manipulation, you must follow two major steps once your target has been primed and is open and receptive to these types of behaviors. You must first create emotions into the target, and then you must be able to exploit those emotions. If you can create and exploit the right emotions within someone, you can sway their behaviors into whatever results you hope to achieve. Typically, the easiest emotions to utilize for this process are fear, anxiety, or sadness. Guilt also works quite well as well—very little is as motivating as some intense guilt. Emotions for Manipulating Fear: When you feel fear or anxiety, you are typically expecting something negative to happen. Usually, you are tensed up, afraid, and waiting for the other shoe to drop, so whatever negative consequence or action that you are anticipating can happen. Usually, this is in response to some sort of threat or danger—you are certain you will be harmed if you are not careful. That fear or anxiety usually plays an important role in your emotional regulation and your survival —when you are afraid, you go into fight or flight response, meaning your body prepares to either fight back or run away. Blood is redirected away from unimportant areas, such as the extremities, and from the higher processing areas in the brain. This, unfortunately, means that your higher level thinking is impaired when you are afraid, and has the effect of leaving you far more susceptible to being convinced or swayed into doing something that you would not normally entertain. You act in fear, just wanting to make the fear or anxiety go away so you can return to your baseline feelings of calmness or happiness. Sadness: When you are sad, usually something bad has happened, and you are mourning or grieving something. You feel a profound loss of something and that hole that whatever it is you are missing hurts. In fact, sadness is a huge motivator for people—it encourages people to avoid repeating mistakes out of fear of losing something else. When you are sad, your mind and body are essentially telling you to not repeat whatever had just happened because it was bad. Of course, when people are sad, their rational minds are not working entirely—those who make decisions when sad are far more likely to be swayed by someone else. If the manipulator can get their target to fall into sadness, the target is more likely to go along with anything the manipulator says, simply wanting to be freed of the sadness that is overwhelming him or her. e Guilt: Guilt is what we feel when we fail to complete an obligation. Ultimately, we feel obligations to those we love and trust the most—it is a sort of way that we ensure that everyone we care about survives. We feel obligated to take care of our children, and that drives most mothers to get out of bed at 3 am when they hear their babies crying for milk, or when the kids are up at 5:30 on the dot, even on Saturday, begging for breakfast. Obligation is what makes you do selfless things for those you love. When you fail to meet those obligations, however, you feel guilt. That guilt lets you know that you failed, and those negative feelings are meant to make you not repeat that mistake again. After all, not meeting obligations could mean the difference between life and death in some situations, and the biological imperative wants you and those you share genes with to survive. When you feel guilty, you are likely to do whatever you can in order to get out from underneath it. Creating Emotions With your understanding of the easiest emotions to manipulate, you now need to take a look at how to instill those emotions in someone else. When you understand how to create an emotion within someone else with very little effort, you are able to make sure you can always control them. The easiest way to create an emotion in someone is to recognize that emotions are motivators—if you can figure out the right trigger, you can create the emotion. For example, if you need to make the person you are trying to control feel guilty in order to get them to do something for you, you would first ask them. When they say no, the trick here is to sigh, pretend to sadly accept the results while referencing how you know how much of a hassle what you are asking about is and that you remember how difficult it was when you did it for the other person. You are likely to hit some guilt buttons in response, triggering the feelings of guilt and therefore making it more likely to get what you want. On the other hand, if you wanted to create sadness, you could tell a story that you know has a sad result just to get the other person into the right frame of mind. For example, if you know the target has children, referring to children dying or getting hurt could get the other person into a sad mindset pretty quickly. This particular emotion is useful when attempting to raise money—appeal to the saddest part of the organization, showing pictures of the starving children that look like they are on the brink of death or the dogs with the sad eyes. The feelings will follow afterward. Exploiting Emotions With the feelings created, it is game time. You can finally begin to exploit them. If you really wanted to go to that game, but your spouse told you no, it is time to pull out the guilt cards. If you are trying to pass a sale on a certain car, appeal to safety features in the model you are pushing. While anger is not typically a very good one to intentionally create because those who are angry are typically less receptive to suggestions, it can have its uses, and if you notice that someone is angry, redirect that anger to someone or something else that will aid you in whatever it is you want. Why Use Covert Emotional Manipulation? Ultimately, there are several reasons for using covert emotional manipulation, and all of them are quite underhanded. Despite that, you may find something on this list that actually helps you somehow. Sales In sales, this can actually be a fantastic skill to utilize, so long as you make it a point to ensure you are selling what is beneficial to the clients that approach you and you do not sell items that have no use to the other person just to get the bonus or sales credit. Utilizing emotional manipulation can actually be quite useful if you believe the other person is making a bad decision and would be better served with some other purchase instead. Advertising Similar to sales, covert emotional manipulation runs rampant throughout various forms of advertising. Everything from the way the pages are formatted to what kinds of pictures are used, are put together in order to create an immersive experience, appealing to whatever emotions will best sell the product that is being advertised. Politics Politicians frequently can use this in order to distract from bigger issues at hand and to gain favor in crowds that might not have been so open without it. For example, they may be able to recognize ways that one group could be swayed, such as appealing to conservative older people with vows of sharing religion and being interested in maintaining said religion, or in siding with younger people through discussing ways to better the economy and protect those who are struggling. Getting What You Want One of the most common ways that covert emotional manipulation is used, however, is to get what you want. Typically, abusers will utilize it this way, seeking to install all sorts of emotional triggers in their victims and then pulling them whenever they see it necessary to get the right results. Covert Emotional Manipulation Tactics Now that you have developed a solid understanding of what covert emotional manipulation requires to be effective, as well as how the process works, you are ready to begin looking at several different tactics that are regularly used in a wide range of situations. Remember, not all of these will be appropriate to use in professional settings, such as in sales or in politics, but they are effective techniques. As you read through each of these, you will see how each seeks to cause an emotion and then subsequently take advantage of it shortly after. During this cycle, people are able to essentially control the emotional reactions of those around them. They are able to cause people to feel all sorts of things, through a wide range of skills, and utilize those skills to the fullest potential they have. Love Bombing and Rejection Perhaps one of the simplest tactics used, but still incredibly effective, is the love bomb and rejection cycle. With this technique, you essentially are repeatedly love bombing to addict the other person to you before suddenly withdrawing affection altogether. Love bombing refers to the tactic of showering someone in all sorts of lavish, meaningful affection, praise, and reinforcements. The purpose of this is to flood the body with all sorts of positive hormones, essentially mimicking the act of falling in love. As you constantly love on someone else, you are rapidly flooding their body with good hormones. As you do this, you are tricking them. Everyone feels good when they are showered with praise, after all—that praise can be incredibly reinforcing. The more the target feels the praise, the love, and the affection, the more thoroughly he or she will be addicted. Frequently, manipulators will use this carefully, appealing to everyone’s inherent desire to be loved and wanted. They will very carefully identify a target, choosing someone who they believe will be receptive to suck manipulation and act quickly. These people are suddenly pushing a whirlwind romance, driving the relationship forward as they do so. They encourage the other person to say that they love the manipulator as quickly as possible. They want the other person to be entirely and utterly intoxicated by the manipulator’s very presence, and constant praise and reinforcement is the way to do so. Through conditioning, the target associates the positive feelings created by the praise and reinforcement with the individual, even though the individual may be less than deserving of such association. When the target is thoroughly ensnared into the manipulator’s trap, the target’s threshold for dealing with unwarranted or unacceptable behavior is elevated—because the target feels as though he or she loves the manipulator, he or she is willing to accept far more from the manipulator than someone who was not essentially addicted to the person’s very presence. This is then tested in the rejection stage. Here, the manipulator will intentionally knock the target off of the elevated pedestal onto which he or she worked so hard to place the individual. Suddenly, the manipulator withdraws all sorts of affection, replacing it with scorn or disdain, and the target is suddenly shocked. Like a drug addict, desperate to score as soon as possible in any way possible, the target will do nearly anything necessary to get back into the good graces of the manipulator, craving those scraps of attention and affection and all the good feelings those scraps will bring. This cycle is repeated again and again, essentially keeping the individual target ensnared in a never ending cycle. The victim feels affection and wanted for a short period, only to be sent crashing back down through rejection and desperately attempting to climb back up the ranks. Reinforcement and Repetition Something that this has not yet touched upon is the idea that reinforcing an idea several times is enough to instill that belief into someone else as well. Through repeatedly mentioning something, that something becomes believed. This concept can be incredibly useful in a wide range of situations, but perhaps the most profound is the idea that a completely false piece of information can be installed. The key here is to choose out a method that will best benefit the manipulator. For example, imagine that you are in a relatively new relationship with a woman. You have gone through the love bombing stages and are now interested in pushing the possibilities a bit further. You decide to convince the victim of something now. In thinking, you realize that perhaps the best concept that would serve you well is that the other person should feel lucky to have you. With that in mind, you repeatedly begin dropping hints around the victim. You mention how lucky the victim is to have such a loving, caring partner like yourself. Even if you are doing something entirely mundane and expected that does not deserve praise, such as taking out the garbage unprompted, you mention how lucky your victim is to have someone like you that cares enough to help without being told to do so. A little later in the day, you may decide to bring your victim a glass of water while she checks emails on her computer. She thanks you and again, you take the chance to add in a quick reference to how lucky she is to have you. After several instances of you naturally dropping such hints, you will be rewarded with the moment of truth—you will do something entirely unordinary and expected, and she will thank you profusely and reiterate just how happy she feels to have you as a partner. This is how you know you did it right. Now, praise that thought process. Shower her with love and affection after she has said it, and she is going to have that concept reinforced in her mind. Unconsciously, she will develop a connection between that thought and good feelings, and she will continue to entertain it. With the thought installed, you are able to use it whenever necessary. You can threaten to withhold affection or break up if she does not do what you ask. If she argues back about something, you can remind her just how lucky she is and that if she isn’t careful, she will lose a really good thing. As you will soon discover, you are appealing to one of the principles of persuasion here—reiterating how much she stands to lose if she does not get in line, and she is likely to give in out of fear of losing what she now believes is the greatest thing that has ever happened to her thanks to your very own manipulation tactics. You inflate the value of the relationship and then utilize the fear of losing that relationship to pull strings and keep the victim in line and obedient. Chapter 12: Basic Fundamentals anipulative people are not really interested in the well being and needs of other people unless their apparent concern allows them to gain control over these people. Knowing the main characteristics of these people will allow you to be alert and able to anticipate the next situation that someone tries to manipulate. For your own good, and in order to know how to deal with manipulative people, analyze these characteristics: 1) Manipulators do not question themselves and think that the problem is always in others. 2) They believe that the way they deal with situations is the only possible way to meet their needs, and that is their main concern. 3) For manipulative people, all situations and all relationships revolve around them and what others think, feel, and want is not valued. 4) They do not accept or understand the limits. They are ruthless in their pursuit of what they want and have little or no regard for the harm that this demand may cause to others. 5) A manipulative person tends to avoid responsibility and to blame other people or external factors. 6) Manipulative people feed on the sensitivity and conscientiousness of others. They know they are more likely to deceive others the more kindly, caring, and helpful they are. They may even praise others for their kindness when they only want this kindness to work in their favor. 7) They are masters of the art of creating intrigue, rivalry, and jealousy among the people around them. They encourage and promote disharmony. All of us have come across manipulative people, whether in the professional field or in a loving relationship. We do not always know how to deal with manipulative people, but these tips can help: 1) Learn to evaluate others for what they do and not so much for what they Say. 2) Reflect often on what you believe in, your ideals, values, and attitudes. When we are not aware of or convinced of what we believe in, it is easier for someone else to manipulate us. 3) Know your rights and recognize when someone tries to violate them. Defend yourself and your rights. 4) A great way to detect a manipulative person is to observe how that person acts in different contexts and with different people. Manipulative people tend to adopt extreme types of behavior and always aim to serve their personal interests. 5) The tactic of the manipulative person is to provoke and exploit the weaknesses of others so that they feel guilty and inadequate. We must question ourselves about the relationships we maintain, whether we are being respected, whether we feel good about the relationship, and whether the expectations and requests of the other person are reasonable. 6) It is important to be able to say "no" diplomatically, but firmly. It allows you to maintain your position, while at the same time not being rude or ill mannered. 7) In all your relationships, create clear and consistent boundaries and ensure that they are respected. Limits and mutual respect facilitate interpersonal relationships. 8) Do not give up your right to an opinion, express what you want and what you need, and always ensure you are treated with respect. 9) Trust your judgment. No one knows what is better for your life than yourself. 10) Remember that no one can manipulate you without your permission. Do not rely over and over again on that person who is constantly failing you and doing you harm. Surround yourself with people who are whole and positive. Manipulators have the ability to cultivate guilt in us, blackmail us and lie shamelessly. We end up doing what they want and following them, even if we have to go beyond our own limits as if our will did not even exist. This game can last for years, poisoning the lives of those who are manipulated. But, do remember your inalienable rights: You have the right to express your views, even if they are different from the other person’s. You have the right to protect yourself from physical, moral, and emotional threats. And you have the right to build your life according to your own notion of happiness. These are the limits of your personal space. Of course, the manipulators are great destroyers of our limits, who do not respect or recognize our rights. But only we ourselves are responsible for our own lives. Keep Your Distance During communication, a manipulator will change their mask all the time: with one person they may be extremely polite, while with another, they may react with violence and rudeness. In one situation the manipulator will impersonate a defenseless person, while in another they will show their aggressive side. If you have already noticed that someone's personality tends to reflect these extremes, the best option is to keep a safe distance from that person and not interact with them unless you really need them. Most commonly, the motives that lead to this behavior are complex and rooted in childhood. Correcting, educating, or saving a manipulator is not your problem. Do Not Take It Seriously The task of a manipulator is to play with a target's weaknesses. It is not surprising that in the presence of such a person, you begin to feel your "inability" and even try to blame yourself for not obeying that person's orders. Identify these emotions and remember that the problem is not in you. They are manipulating you to make you feel that you are not good enough so that you will be willing to submit to the wishes of another, even giving up your own rights. Analyze your relationship with the manipulator by mentally answering the following questions: Does this person show you true respect? Are their requirements and requests well founded? Is it a balanced relationship? Are you the only one who strives to achieve their goals while the other only receives the benefits? Does this relationship prevent you from maintaining a good relationship with yourself? The answers to these questions will help you understand who the problem is, whether it is in you or the other person. Manipulators will always try to coerce you with their requests, making you forget yourself and your needs. If the manipulator tries to offend you or refute your arguments, shift the focus of attention from yourself to your interlocutor. Ask a few test questions, and it will be clearer to you if such a person has at least a bit of self criticism and/or shame. "Do you think it's fair that you're asking me that?" "You think this is fair to me?" "Can I have my own opinion on this?" "Are you asking or affirming?" "What do I get in return?" "Do you really think I ... (restate the manipulator's request) ...?" Asking these questions is like putting the manipulator in front of a mirror, where the person will see the "reflection", the true nature of their request. Still, there is a unique type of character who will not even bother to listen to you and will constantly insist on their own ideas. In that case, take the following advice: Do not rush! Another of the manipulator's preferred strategies is to force you to respond or act immediately. In a situation where the time goes by fast, it is easier for him to manipulate someone to get what he wants (in sales language, it would be like saying "close the deal"). If you feel you are being pressured, do not rush to make a decision. Use the time factor in your favor, remove the chance of having your will coerced. You will keep track of the situation by saying "I'll think about it". These are very effective words! Take a break to look at the pros and cons. Determine whether you want to continue arguing about it or give it a definite "no". Learn to Say 'No' Knowing how to say 'no' is the most important part of the art of communication. A clear denial allows you to remain immobile in your opinion, creating a good relationship with your interlocutor (if his intentions are healthy). Remember that you have the right to set your priorities, you have the right to say 'no' without feeling guilty. You have the right to choose your own path to happiness. Tell Him About the Consequences As aresponse to gross intrusions into your personal space and the difficulty in accepting your 'no', speak to the manipulator about the consequences of their actions. The ability to convincingly identify and expose possible outcomes is one of the most efficient methods of truncating the game's manipulation. You'll put him in a dead end, forcing him to change his attitude toward you or even reveal his plan, making it infeasible. Defend Yourself from Mockery and Offenses Sometimes manipulators even offend or mock directly, trying to scare their victims or cause them some kind of suffering. The most important thing to remember is that people like this cling to what they believe to be a weakness. As long as you are passive and obedient, it will be an easy target before their eyes. The curious thing about this is that, in most cases, this type of person is, in reality, cowardly. As soon as the victim begins to demonstrate personality and defend their rights, the manipulator withdraws. This rule works in any sphere of society, whether at school, in the family, or even at work. Remember that it is not worth getting into a fight, just keep your cool and make your point clear. According to studies, many abusers have been or are abused. It is obvious that this condition in no way justifies their behavior, but it is important to remember to respond to their actions with cold blood and without any remorse. While most people may say that they would not be attracted to a narcissistic or psychopathic partner, several studies have already confirmed that obscure personalities attract us sexually. The truth is that many people are mysteriously attracted to these profiles. Recent research has found that individuals with "shadowy" personality traits are more physically attractive than normal people. But what is so attractive about these citizens? According to experts, the personality traits of narcissists make these people consistently successful. According to Nicholas Holtzman and Michael Strube of the University of Washington, there is a direct relationship between physical attraction and people's tendencies toward narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. For researchers, these characteristics have an influence on people's physical appearance and behavior. In an interview with 111 college students, a group of volunteers, both men and women, were photographed without makeup and with makeup along with a more polished look. Then the photos were shown to strangers. By comparing the student's attractiveness indexes, the researchers were able to determine how much each student was able to become more attractive with the use of makeup, accessories, and more flashy clothing. Then Holtzman and Strube evaluated students according to their personalities and tendencies for narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. This combination of assessments was used to calculate a final personality score for each volunteer. The result of the study showed that people with obscure personality traits are always seen as more physically attractive than others. This proves that narcissists are more popular and considered more sympathetic. In addition, they are more effective at presenting themselves in a way that makes a good impression. The researchers also concluded that when we perceive someone as physically attractive, we automatically assume that they are also kinder, smarter, and more confident. Combining physical attractiveness with confidence and humor, narcissists have a great trump card in their favor. Narcissists' Popularity Despite being quite successful with the opposite sex, the popularity of narcissists tends to decline over time. The process may take several weeks, perhaps because people with obscure personality traits are really skilled at keeping their nasty side hidden from others. Conclusion f you have once found yourself among the group of people who often wonder why humans act the way they do, it is a great pleasure to have had this rollercoaster ride with you around everything you need to know about dark psychology and mind control, how it works and why people use it. At the beginning of life, psychologists say humans are born in a state known as “tabula rasa,” which in English translates to a “blank slate.” Therefore, it is the interaction of nature and nurture of people that forms the personality of every human. Some may be smarter than others, while some will not be as smart. Interestingly, the smart ones are the ones that can easily make use of mind control techniques to make their way through any situation. On the surface, these people may seem to just be going about life like every other human, but beyond the surface there are a lot of things going on within their psyche. They are always on the lookout for gestures, perceptions and even intuitions. These are the factors that will determine the way they relate to the things and the people around them. With the use of mind control techniques, people can manipulate other people and situations so that they will be able to get the things they want whenever they want them. With the techniques discussed, you have discovered ways to make sure that everything works in your favor. You can either brainwash, manipulate, seduce or even hypnotize your target(s) to get your desired result. Those that are not as smart will always fall prey to this kind of mind control techniques. They will always be at the receiving end of situations involving dark psychology. Mind controllers, instead of seeing people as partners with whom they can work with to achieve great results, would rather see others as tools to be used. This will result in adverse psychological effects that could get as serious as losing one's mind and sense of self. What's more, gaining control of the mind of another person can lead them to depression and suicide if it is not well managed. In closing, this has given you all you need to know about mind control. It is hoped by at this point you have learned how to spot, avoid and use these tools. Remember, mind control is not only about negativity, it can also be put to some positive use. Whatever you choose to use it for, this has surely brought you all you need to make use of it. Good luck! PART IT — Stoicism Introduction when you work hard but don’t seem to get rewarded. Moreover, life seems to favor those who do not deserve the credit and disfavors those who are equally deserving of an opportunity. What comes out of such situations is pain and desperation. However, Zeno of Citium founded the school of thought known as “stoicism” which was designed to deal with the misfortunes of life. This philosophy states that the human path is engrossed with pain and that one has to accept the situations as they present themselves. In such cases, one should embrace endurance and not be controlled by the pleasures and sufferings of this world. Over the years, stoicism scholars have identified eudaimonia (which can be interpreted as happiness or welfare) as the core tenet in a person’s life. ! lhere are times when life seems to be unfair. This is especially true To gain such happiness, you are obliged to behave virtuously. This means that you ought to act according to the appropriate morals of your society. Therefore, the stoics propose that a virtuous attitude is internal, and that external things such as riches and material desires should not be of significant concern. Other scholars like Epictetus, Seneca and Marcus Aurelius acknowledged that nature practically controls every social situation. Therefore, judgment is meant to be vindicated upon the behavior of a person rather than their words. They concluded that nature controls everything that happens in this world. Therefore, the stoic ideology is paramount to the understanding of the various principles that govern it. Such principles include nature, reason, virtue, wisdom, and duty. All of these principles are to be held in high esteem and not dismissed in everyday life. Stoicism is simply a wisdom philosophy. In other words, it is a philosophy that teaches you how to live life well. Every human being desires to live a life of happiness, and Stoicism seeks to increase your happiness. Stoicism is a philosophy that you can live by. In fact, Stoicism is the only philosophy that from its inception addressed all humans. The Stoic philosophy saw all genders, races, and social classes as being equal to one another. This also explains why Stoicism has managed to survive for more than 2300 years. It is acceptable by people of all colors, classes, and cultures. It has evolved together with humanity. Stoicism holds the most practical and relevant rules for all sorts of artists, writers, and entrepreneurs. Their attention is always on two specific things: e How to live a happy, fulfilling, and wonderful life? e How to turn yourself into a better person? The main goal is finding inner peace by realizing we only have a short time to live, being aware of impulses, having self control, overcome adversity. These are meditative practices that will help us live with nature and not against it. We have to understand obstacles we face and never run away. We must turn them into fuel for our fires. According to Stoic philosophy, there is nothing that can be considered good or bad. Everything is down to our perception and judgment. The only good thing that exists is Virtue, and this is the highest ideal everyone should pursue. Stoics believe that evil does not exist in nature, but it is human behavior that causes harm. People who cause harm lack virtue and have refused to live according to nature. For Stoics, the highest ideal is to achieve a noble character. This has nothing to do with wealth or status. It is only achievable if you live according to nature and pursue virtue in everything that you do. The unique charm and value of stoicism that make it so important and easy to practice even nowadays is its accessibility and its applicability. One of the main goals of stoicism was liberation from suffering and endurance when faced with life’s highs and lows. The aim of this is to provide you with practical knowledge about this notion which is not only an abstraction praised by philosophers in old times. This is your short guide to stoicism and to various means of practicing it in your life. In the following pages, you will discover why even in modern, technology dominated, and consume oriented times like ours, stoicism remains an important value. Stoicism can be both a tool and a weapon. If you understand it in depth and know how to practice it, stoicism can be your key to strength and to happiness. Learning how to consciously value stoicism can make you tremendously independent and unshakeable in many situations you encounter in life. If you want to rediscover an old lesson in personal empowerment in a new light, read on and allow yourself to benefit from the potential of this unique virtue. Everybody today is searching for a way to be truly happy. This explains why we all find ourselves chasing after more money, more friends, and more stuff. Yet at the end of our lives, we realize that it was all for nothing. So, is the Stoic philosophy the best answer? If you wish to learn more about stoicism, this is perfect for you. The main goal of this is to answer a lot of questions like what stoicism is, what is its history, what is its virtue and more. It teaches how to become a better person by finding your inner peace and mindfulness. You needed a change, you wanted to get out of this circle, you wanted to succeed and now finally you found this. Nobody is in charge of your life. It is only your responsibility to do all the steps towards better future. That is why you have to ask yourself honestly if you want to achieve something big and to inspire other people. Chapter 1 What is Stoicism? toicism is an interesting idea from ancient times that has really translated over to modern times. It came out during a time of great turmoil in ancient times, a time when emotions could get out of hand and life was not a predictable thing like before. The tenets that come with Stoicism often work well with times that are tough, times of misunderstanding and conflict, which is why it can sometimes work so well in our modern times. The ideas behind Stoicism help you to find true happiness. This philosophy is meant to put you in control of your emotions, allowing you to look at the situation logically, rather than letting your emotions get out of control and determine how you react, sometimes making you to react in ways that you are ashamed of later on. In addition, you will be able to understand how others react in some cases, keeping your relationships strong while also working with helping out others. The History of Stoicism Before we are able to look at how to get started with Stoicism, we need to have a bit of background about Stoicism. Stoicism is a philosophy that was founded by Zeno of Citium around the 3rd century BC. The philosophy asserts that the follower needs to have virtues, like wisdom, in order to find happiness and that any judgment needs to be based on the behavior of the other person, rather than on their words. Stoicism often talks about how we are not the ones in control of, and that we can’t rely on, the external events that go on around us. But we can control how we respond to these events. Stoicism is a pretty simple philosophy, but in many cases, it can be hard to stick with. It works to remind us that the world is unpredictable and that our moment in life is pretty brief. It works to teach us how to be strong and steadfast and that to find true happiness with our short time on this earth, we need to be able to control ourselves. It also recognizes that many people are unhappy in life, but the source of this dissatisfaction is not in having too little money or not having enough stuff, it is with our dependency on our emotions and acting out right away, rather than using logic. One of the nice things that you can find with Stoicism is that it doesn’t spend time with complicated theories that try to explain the world. Rather, it spends its time trying to help us to fight and overcome some of our own destructive emotions and how to act when actions can be taken. The principles of Stoicism are all about action, not debating all of the time. There are three principal people who are considered leaders of the ideas of Stoicism. Marcus Aurelius was one of the most powerful people in the world at that time as the Emperor of the Roman Empire at that time, and yet he sat down every day to write out some notes on the topics of compassion, humility, and restraint. Then there was Epictetus, who spent much time as a slave and then endured in order to begin his own school in which he was about to teach some of the greatest minds in Rome. And then there was Seneca, who was turned on by Nero and asked to commit suicide, was then able to think only of comforting his friends and his wife. But while those three are considered the leaders of Stoicism, there are many others who have practiced it throughout the ages, including entrepreneurs, writers, artists, kings, and presidents. Both modern, as well as historical, men, are able to show Stoicism as their way of life. For example, the founding fathers spent time being inspired by the ideas of Stoicism. It is said that George Washington learned about Stoicism at the age of 17 by his neighbors and then later he put on plays, including one about Cato, to help inspire his men at Valley Forge. Thomas Jefferson kept Seneca right beside him on his death bed. Adam Smith, an economist, write out theories of interconnectedness, or capitalism, and much of his ideas where influenced by the ideas of Stoicism. These are just a few examples of how Stoicism has expanded to mean much more than just an ancient philosophy. It is one that has helped countless people to overcome their dissatisfaction in the world and to find happiness. While it may have occurred in ancient times, people of today will be able to find it useful as well. Stoicism will differ compared to many of the existing philosophies in one main sense, it is more about action and putting the ideas to work, rather than just talking about them all of the time. If you learn how to control your emotions, learn how to control the things that you can and give up on those that you can’t, and learn how to think about things logically, you are able to live the Stoic way of life and you will see a huge increase in your happiness. Some of the basic ideas of the stoics e The Stoic ideas are great to use in order to increase the happiness you have in your life, regardless of what is going on in the outside world. Some of the basic ideas that are found with the stoics include: e The key to living successfully and feeling happy, is to find freedom from the violent emotions. You are still able to enjoy emotions like joy and happiness, but you will be able to think about things logically and pick the emotions that are right for the situation. e The key to get freedom from these violent feelings is to be virtuous, regardless of what others may think about you. e The key to living a life that is virtuous is to live in a manner that is consistent with nature. e The things that most people call good, such as a good reputation, possessions, health, and life can often be in accordance of our nature, but we shouldn’t always be running around for more things. e These things are not always in accord with our nature because sometimes they can be purchased or preserved at the expense of your virtue and your integrity. e Successful living and virtue may not be inborn in all people, but with a deliberate choice and continuous attention you are able to figure out what is inside of your power and what is not. The idea of Stoicism is one that is all about your happiness and enjoying life. You learn that it is not all about the materialistic things, it is about living a good life, one where you are slow to anger because you understand why others react the way that they do and where you are willing to help out other people. It is one where you are able to look at your emotions and determine if they are really the ones that will help you to be happy in that situation. Many people think that the Stoics are indifferent to everything in life, that they don’t care about what is going on around them, but this is not true; they simply understand that not everything needs to be reacted to in anger or in retaliation all of the time. Many people believe that Stoicism is an ancient thought system, one that they shouldn’t follow or worry about at all because it is so old and can’t relate to them. But in our modern times when emotions and materialism is all over the place, it is good to have a philosophy like Stoicism around to help us enjoy our lives and to focus on things that really matter. Before we get into how your life should be when you want to follow stoicism it is important to understand what this school of thought is all about. When you get a chance to explore this, it is much easier to see how stoicism is able to work for your needs and you can maybe figure some of the different ways that you can make changes all on your own. Stoicism was one of the brand new philosophical movements that happened during the Hellenistic period. This school of philosophy was founded in Athens during the early 3rd century BC, but it has been practiced through many different time periods because the ideas that come with it have practical uses even today. The philosophy of stoicism is all about asserting that virtue, like wisdom, is happiness and that a judgment needs to be based on the behavior, rather than the words. It also talks about how we are not able to rely on or control some of the external events that are going on around us, but we can control how we react and our responses to what happens. That is just some of the basic of stoicism. There are also a few central teachings that come with it as well. The ideas are meant to remind us that the world is going to be unpredictable and getting all upset about it is just going to make us unhappy when we realize that we don’t have any control over it. It helps us to realize that we can’t be in control, but we can learn how to find happiness inside of ourselves and be steadfast and strong, regardless of what chaos is going on around us. Stoics are often looking to quell that dissatisfaction that is common in most of us. But while other people are going to blame external events for this unhappiness and dissatisfaction, the Stoics understand that this comes from their impulsive dependency rather than on logic. If you want to be happy, you need to learn how to rely on yourself, and not on outside events that can constantly change and you have no control over. Stoicism may sound confusing, but it is actually not going to concern itself with some of the other complicated theories that are out there in the world. It is more about learning how to overcome some of our emotions that are considered destructive and to learn to act when we can actually do some actions. It is not meant for a lot of endless debates. It helps us to realize what we can do to make changes in our lives, and how to just be strong and not worry when things are beyond our control. Originally, Stoicism had three leaders: Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and Seneca. Despite having these three that helped to start it, there are many people throughout history who have practiced Stoicism including entrepreneurs, writers, artists, presidents, and kings. For example, it was said that King Frederick the Great would ride around with some of the works of stoicism because they could “sustain you in misfortune.” Now, stoicism is still found in our modern times. Take a look at the word “stoic” in the English language. This is a word that has a meaning that is similar to what the original stoics practiced when the religion started in that this word will refer to someone who seems to be indifferent to grief, joy, pleasure, or pain. Of course, the stoics do feel emotions and you don’t have to completely give up on all of the feelings in your life in order to be a stoic. The difference in that you need to learn how to control your emotions and find happiness from within. There are going to be events in your life that are hard, ones that don’t go your way, but if you spend your time getting all worked up about the emotions that you are feeling, you are ruining your happiness, and it is mostly over things that you aren’t able to control. You can enjoy the joyous occasions in your life and be happy, but you learn how to control your emotions. While the ideas of stoicism may have started many years ago in ancient Greece, there are still many people who use this school of thought in their daily lives even in modern times. This is a great school of thought that you are able to follow if you are ready to learn how to let go of the things that are out of your control and to find your own inner happiness. In this, we will take some time to explore some of the different aspects that come with Stoicism and how you can make this work in your own life as well. Chapter 2 The Promise of Stoic Philosophy onsider seeing a lush green tree growing in the middle of a scorching hot desert. A tree that is flourishing and thriving despite the extremities of the weather. It would present such a pleasant sight for any onlookers. Rather than creating a selfish, destructive environment, the tree would provide shade to those who find the heat unbearable. The tree in this example is being virtuous, accepting the factors that are not within its control, and not letting hardships deter its growth. Doesn’t that sound familiar? The tree in the aforementioned example is the embodiment of Stoic philosophy. However, what is considered normal living for the tree, would be considered no less than a miracle to others. Anyone who sees the tree would be interested in knowing how it has managed not to wither and die. How it has persevered against drought, strong desert winds, and unrelenting heat. When an idea inspires you, it also makes you curious about the hypothesis that led to it. Somehow, the path to achieving that level of wisdom becomes more important than merely admiring it from afar. You wonder if you can personalize the idea and use it to improve your own situation. We familiarized the readers with the idea of Stoicism and the lives of the most prominent Stoic philosophers. Now, the text will focus on more practical aspects, such as how to live by Stoic principles and why it will benefit you. The first step is to incorporate a few core values in your lifestyles which resonate with Stoic beliefs. Essential beliefs and principles of Stoicism Luckily, Stoicism is not a rigid doctrine. It addresses your doubts and apprehensions without labeling you as an infidel. It is also flexible and convenient to adopt. For example, if the philosophy suggests that you practice remaining calm, it does so without outlining a stringent exercise. Hence, it is very possible to merge Stoic virtues with your own faith. In fact, it is actually an extension of your faith. You could remain calm by meditating, praying, reading the Holy Scriptures, or choosing to exercise. And, you can start right away without requiring formal training or ‘acceptance’ of any type of faith. Although there is no exhaustive list of Stoic values, it would be nice to have some guidance for beginners. Some starter principles are discussed in detail below. Remember, as long as you preserve the essence of the teachings, you can always modify the beliefs to suit your needs. Amor Fati — Love Your Life Negative emotions such as anger, hate, and sorrow, can be quite exhausting. They put a strain on our mental and physical health. Our frustrations are often related to a lack of acceptance of reality. Once we accept what we cannot change, we tend to become calmer and more peaceful. The term Amor Fati was first popularized by Friedrich Nietzsche, who saw greatness in anybody who could not only accept his/her fate, but actually love it. It can be simplified into the idea that you ought not complain about your life, and that you should learn to embrace its imperfections. It is the appreciation of the little things that life has to offer. For example, if you’re fond of rainy weather, it does not mean that you cease to cherish the sun. Once you become used to reviewing every situation impersonally, based on logic, you realize how easy this is. It would mean that you realize the importance of the sun and begin to value its existence. Although Amor Fati was a title given to this phenomenon by Nietzsche, the Stoics could relate the concept to the teachings of their forefathers. We have learned that Epictetus did not see the loss of his leg as an impediment. He accepted his reality wholeheartedly, which enabled him to live a more fulfilling life. Through his practical example, the Stoic philosopher put forward the concept of Amor Fati, which is Latin for ‘love of fate’. Similar examples were set by other Stoics of the past. However, we should admit that we have heard such phrases so often that they may have started to lose their meaning and significance. What’s different about Stoic philosophy, however, is that it does not simply dictate that you ‘love your life’. Stoics trust nature to have the best plan laid out, while also encouraging you to enhance your cognitive skills so that you can rationalize everything. They believe that by becoming more mindful of your surroundings, you will automatically begin to adore the marvels that you otherwise fail to acknowledge. Thus, loving your life would lead to the ultimate Stoic goal of achieving eudaimonia. Practice Misfortune — Always Be Prepared The biggest reason for our sleepless nights and anxious behaviors in the present is fear. The fear of something going wrong, the fear of some outcome other than what we desire. This fear affects our decision making ability, our performance, and our overall health. For a moment, let’s imagine how liberating it would be to live in complete freedom from this fear. The fear of a misfortune clips our wings and prevents us from daring to try our hand at innovations. It cripples our ability to make effort, or to take a leap of faith toward our goals. Practicing misfortune in Stoicism refers to developing a fearless attitude by imagining the worst possible outcome and preparing yourself to face it. Regardless of the likelihood of it actually happening, you would find yourself more at ease with taking risks. As long as you are not reckless, greater risks could mean greater rewards. When we’re starting a new job, moving into a new town, or meeting someone for the first time, our brain is accustomed to asking “what if?” What if I fail at the job? What if the place isn’t safe? What if that person I know turns out to be a disappointment? Being a Stoic, you would maintain a calm mind and try to prepare yourself for such outcomes. If you lose the job, it was fate’s plan for you all along, and yov’ll soon find the one you’re destined for. If somebody does damage to you or your possessions, you will survive it if you are meant to, maintaining your contentment regardless. If things go sour with an acquaintance, you’ll be able to detach yourself. Suddenly, by addressing your apprehensions, you have also eliminated the aspect of fear. The daunting nature of uncertainty can be more unnerving than actual misadventures, so it is wise to hope for the best while also preparing yourself for the worst. Memento Mori — It’s All Ephemeral It is a universal fact that short lived things are valued more. If we’re aware that what we have can be taken away from us at any moment, we tend to make the best use of it while it lasts. We do not take such things for granted. What we often forget is that life too is one of those finite things. We continue to make long term plans, elaborating the ways we want events to unfold. We often get carried away by our aspirations and forget to live in the moment. Stoicism teaches you to adopt a proactive approach to life. When you constantly remind yourself that death is always looming over you, you unveil a previously undiscovered treasure of efficiency. You become more productive, accumulate more good deeds, and make better use of your resources. In short, you make hay while the sun shines. Another interpretation of Memento Mori (which is a Latin phrase, meaning ‘remember you will die’) is that when life puts you in a favorable situation, be careful not to dwell on it. If you’re blessed with immense riches, you should still maintain simple living standards, staying alert to the temporary nature of the world. This also ensures humility. Alternatively, in adversity, you must remember that it is not a permanent state, so you should not let it dampen your spirits. Living in the moment would enable you to avoid excessive emotions related to the past or present. It would thus save you from getting overly attached to life and worldly belongings. Greater Command over Perception — Take Control of Your Feelings There is no built in feature in the human body that would allow us to switch off our feelings. No matter how badly we want to do that, we simply can’t. At least, not without becoming totally apathetic to our surroundings, which would not be a healthy goal. The goal is to be able to exercise greater control over our feelings. The Stoics suggest that one should train his/her brain to perceive circumstances in a positive way. The question is, how? Remember when Zeno perceived the shipwreck as a blessing in disguise, rather than a tragedy? He did this by choosing to focus on the good that came from it. He was thankful for the events that were responsible for his foray into philosophy. Today, we all know how right he was and how fate had better plans for him. So, the answer is pretty simple — the events in our lives are neutral. It is actually our reaction that makes them good or bad. We cannot choose what will happen, but we can certainly choose how to react. Some of us do acknowledge that what happens is for the best, but it is mostly in hindsight. Stoicism requires that we maintain this mentality at all times. Remember... this is different from being apathetic. It does not mean that you should laugh at terrible pains and misfortunes, or try to numb them out. It simply means you should rationally try to analyze each situation. If you were to get into an accident because you were speeding, you wouldn’t be able to rationally say that it happened because your life is awful. Your best course of action would be to take care of the problem in that current moment, rather than yelling, cursing, or trying to find something else to blame. It would not give you a valid reason to be harsh or cold or moody to everyone that you encounter that day. Basically, what had to happen, happened. Stoic philosophy uses logic and reasoning to scrutinize a situation. By letting emotions overpower us, we waste our energy on things that are unimportant and reduce productivity. When you’re in command of your perception, this unnecessary sweat can be avoided. Premeditatio Malorum Earlier, we discussed the concept of practicing misfortune, which is a kind of mental preparation for things that could go wrong. Premeditatio Malorum is an extension of the same principle. The phrase translates into ‘the premeditation of evils’. While practicing misfortune is all about addressing your fears, meditating on negative outcomes would mean deliberately convincing yourself that things COULD go wrong. Instead of thinking ‘if this goes wrong, PI do so and so’, you imagine that it will go wrong and that is absolutely okay. Premeditatio Malorum is not entirely separate from the practice of misfortunes, but almost the next step in the sequence. It requires great time and understanding, which might make it unsuitable for beginners. To better understand the principle, it is important to study the lives of ancient Stoic philosophers in detail. Virtuous Living Nothing holds more importance in Stoicism than living by the best moral standards. Stoics believe that your decisions in life should be measured with only one yardstick — morality. Instead of profit and loss, the two sides of the weighing scale should be how moral or amoral a business might be. The Stoic philosophers laid great emphasis on keeping the conscience clear. They believed that our actions should be led by our moral compass. From Seneca to Marcus Aurelius, the early Stoics believed in maintaining good intentions and leaving the rest to destiny. By allowing desires to be the driving force in life, we open the door for corruption. Whether it is the wish for greater riches or a lust for power, desires can be terribly intoxicating. They can make us forget our values and fix our attention on achieving ends that don’t justify their means. Stoicism draws a distinct line between needs and wants. Once you know the difference between what is a necessity and what is merely a material want, you become content with whatever you can acquire by rightful means. Through moral enlightenment, you disempower your desires. As a society, we could benefit a great deal from the adoption of Stoic virtues. Many corrupt practices could be eliminated and conflicts could be resolved with ease. Plato’s View It is quite unfortunate that we fail to analyze our actions from others’ points of view. True neutrality is about subjecting our own conduct to the same scrutiny that we subject others to. Our judgments often view others through a different lens than the one we have custom made for ourselves. We find it extremely difficult to analyze situations without any emotional bias. If the same sin is committed by two people and we happen to be fonder of one than the other, the gravity of each equal wrongdoing seems to differ significantly in our minds. This is not just unfair to others; it also betrays our own intelligence. Plato’s view or ‘the view from above’ applies uniform evaluation standards to everyone’s actions, including our own. It allows us to examine scenarios from afar, leading to greater neutrality. Therefore, we become more mindful and pay greater attention to our moral conduct, two of the core Stoic principles. However, there is one thing that we must keep in mind — we should ensure that our thinking is not influenced by the views of others. Our accountability should be based on our own values, rather than a third person’s opinions. Marcus Aurelius warned against paying more attention to what other people think and ignoring our own instincts. This would most likely only lead to feelings of resentment. The Good, Bad and the Indifferent Stoicism classifies life events into three broad categories. They are: good, bad and indifferent. The ‘good’ includes virtues, as well as things that lead to eudaimonia. The ‘bad’ are all the malpractices, or, the opposite of virtue. Indifferent things refer to fate, destiny, and everything that is part of nature, and hence, beyond our control. Let us try to understand all three separately. The good feelings are also known as eupatheia. They include all the things that the Stoics deem important, such as living by virtue, Amor Fati, and staying mindful. Embracing the good, according to Stoic philosophy, leads to apatheia i.e. equanimity. The bad things are those that incite feelings of fear or desire, negating the core principles of Stoicism. One should identify these and practice restraint, which would lead him/her to a better self understanding and awareness. Indifferent things include anything that is neither good nor bad. These are to be accepted, as they are and not given unnecessary time and attention. One should not care about unimportant things and try to remain focused on practicing ‘good’ and avoiding the ‘bad’. Journal Since childhood, many of us have been taught to record our thoughts in a diary or journal. The habit seems difficult to develop and maintain, but once you include it in your routine, your life will begin to seem incomplete without it. When you jot down your thoughts, you are not just writing; you are actually doing a whole lot more. Recording your thoughts is equivalent to saying them out aloud. It acts as a tool for accountability. If a thought is not worthy of being shared publicly, it is not a thought worth acknowledging. One tends to be more cautious and mindful once his/her thoughts are translated into words. This is in line with the Stoic teachings to ‘guard your thoughts’. It strengthens one’s character as he/she starts acknowledging only those thoughts which are worthwhile. If only more people practiced this, the world would be a much more peaceful place, considering that many of the most sinister crimes originate from the most impulsive, simplistic thinking. Another reason to consider journaling, from the Stoic perspective, is that it enhances creativity. It leaves less time for negative feelings and filters your ideas until only the most refined versions remain. Contemplative skills are improved without much effort. All great Stoic philosophers were also dedicated intellectuals. They all documented their musings in one way or the other. That is why the philosophy flourished as much as it did. Thus, an act as simple as maintaining a daily journal can improve the quality — not just of your own life, but of society’s as a whole. Chapter 3 The Most Important Stoic Philosophers fter the passing of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE, the Greek empire’s disintegration brought in the beginning of the Hellenistic period, during which several philosophies, including Stoicism, flourished. The most notable ancient Stoics lived beginning from 301 BC to 180 C.E. Below are the most notable ancient Stoic philosophers you need to know. Zeno of Citium (334 to 262 BCE) Originating from Citium (modern day Cyprus), Zeno established and taught at the Stoic school of philosophy from around 300 BC in Athens. Most of what we know about his life comes from the memoir "Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers," composed by Diogenes Laértius. According to Diogenes, Zeno was a haggard, dark skinned person who lived an ascetic life despite his wealth. Just like his father, Zeno also became a wealthy merchant who made his fortune from trading a purple or violet dye extracted from the murex sea snail. On a sea trade voyage, Zeno of Citium (modern Cyprus) was supposed to transport his cargo of purple dye from the island of Phoenicia to Peiraeus when he was caught in a terrible storm. Tragedy hit when his ship sank. Zeno managed to survive and was luckily washed ashore near the seaport of Athens. Upon realizing the damage, he was distraught; he has lost everything he owned. He has nothing but the ragged clothes on his back. While walking the streets of the foreign city of Athens, he visited a bookseller, encountered Xenophon’s Memorabilia, and met the most famous Cynic philosopher at that time, Crates of Thebes. Zeno eventually became the pupil of Crates of Thebes and then studied under other philosophers such as Stilpo the Megarian and Polemo. After studying for many years, he established his own school at around 301 BC and began to teach on the Stoa Poikile or ‘Painted Porch’ (Ancient Greek: ġ nown otod), a colonnade decorated with historical and mythical battle scenes, on the north side of the market place in Athens. When Zeno started teaching, he could not afford a building such as Plato’s Academy or Aristotle’s Lyceum, so he and his followers probably gathered under the shade of a store in the marketplace. Because it was an open area, anyone interested could listen and join in the debate. Today we know the philosophy as Stoicism, a name deriving from the Stoa Poikile. But it was initially known as “Zenonism,” after the founder Zeno of Citium. However, this name was soon dropped because the Stoics did not consider the founders to be perfectly wise, and to avoid the risk of the philosophy becoming an apotheosis or cult of personality. Due to Zeno’s years of study under the Cynic philosopher Crates of Thebes, much of Stoicism is based on the moral ideas of Cynism. Stoic philosophy emphasizes on the genuine feelings of serenity and goodness that originates from carrying on with an actual existence of prudence in understanding with nature. The philosophy was so successful that it became the leading philosophical thought from the Greek to the Roman period. Cleanthes (330 BC 230 BC) As the successor to Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes of Assos was the second scholarch or leader of the Stoic school in Athens. As indicated by Diogenes, he was conceived in Assos in the Troad to a poor family and working on boxing during his adolescence. He came to Athens with just four drachmae in his pocket and bolstered himself by working during the evening as a water transporter to a nursery worker. During the day, he invested hours contemplating reasoning under Zeno. In view of his highly good characteristics, persistent perseverance, and enterprising nature, on the demise of Zeno in 262, he turned into the Stoic school's successor. Regardless of that, he kept on supporting himself by the work of his own hands. He died at 99 years old in 230 B.C. Chrysippus of Soli (279 BC — 206 BC) He was the child of Apollonius of Tarsus and was a local of Soli, Cilicia and became into the second scholarch of the Stoic school. Eventually, he became the second scholarch of the Stoic school. He was said to be short in stature and have trained as a long distance runner. He moved to Athens where he turned into an understudy of Cleanthes. He was known for his intellect, self confidence, self reliance, and prolific writing. Diogenes wrote that Chrysippus composed more than 705 works and rarely went without writing five hundred lines a day. Through his writings, he expanded on he developed the major regulations of the Stoic originator, Zeno of Citium. Shockingly, none of his formed works have endured the exemption of parts cited underway of later creators like Cicero, Seneca, Galen, Plutarch, and others. (95 BC — 46 BC) Marcus Porcius Cato Uticensis His folks passed on when he was young. He and his sister Porcia (Porcia the Elder) was cared for by their extremely wealthy maternal uncle, Marcus Livius Drusus, a distinguished Roman politician and reformer. Besides being a renowned orator, Cato is famous for his stubbornness, moral integrity, immunity to bribes, and his dictates for the abundant corruption of the period. Most importantly, history recalls Cato as Julius Caesar's most imposing, maddening foe. While he wrote neither a biography nor left behind any essays of journals, Cato the Younger surrounded himself with philosophers, not political advisors and made his own version of fundamental Stoic ideas. He even went so far as to create his individual Stoic exercises. He would train himself to endure self control and patience by walking around Rome in odd clothing, to get people to laugh at him. His hard work seems to have paid off. Porcia Catonis (70 BC — 43 BC) Known by many names (Porcia Cartonis; Porcia of Cato; Porcia the daughter of Cato), Porcia is the daughter of Cato the Younger and his first wife, Atilia. She is the most famous among the three ancient women of Stoicism. She was a coeval the Stoic philosopher Posidonius of Rhodes and Roman senator, Cicero. She is better known for being the second spouse of Brutus, one of the assassins of Julius Caesar's and for her alleged suicide. Gaius Musonius Rufus (20 30 CE — 101 CE) While he may not be as famous as the Greek philosopher Socrates, Gaius Musonius Rufus is considered to be the foremost stoic of his day and had been called by Roman historians as “The Roman Socrates.” The son of a Roman eques, he taught philosophy during the infamous rule of Roman Emperor Nero. He was exiled from Rome three times in all the first was in 60 CE, then in 65 CE, and again in 75 CE. It is in his second exile where he became a real practitioner of the Stoic art of living. Because of his practice and teachings of Stoicism, Mosonius Rufus became an object of suspicion and abhorrence at Nero’s court. He was banished to the arid and unpopulated island of Gyaros in 65 CE. A gathering of pieces from his addresses still perseveres. He is moreover associated with being the teacher of Epictetus. The Three Most Important Stoics Lucius Annaeus Seneca (4 BC — 65 BC) Referred to just as Seneca, he was a Stoic philosopher, writer, and Roman politician. During his initial youth, he got philosophical preparing from Attalus the Stoic. He was likewise considered under the scholars, Sotion, and Papirius Fabianus both of whom had a place with the brief School of Sextii, a Roman school of theory that mixed Pythagorean, Platonic, Cynic, and Stoic components together. Seneca was designated tutor to young Nero, the future emperor of Rome. From 54 to 62 CE, he became Nero’s advisor and was appointed suffect consul in 56 CE. Seneca the Younger wrote the most of the existing literature on Stoicism, including his famous philosophical letters to his friend Lucilius, the landmark treatise On Anger, and several other books. Epictetus (c. 55 CE — 135 CE) Epictetus was brought into the world a slave. He was born and spent most of his early childhood in Hierapolis, Phrygia. His master was Epaphroditus, an administrator for the Roman Emperor Nero. It also unknown when he came to Rome. While in Rome, it is believed that Epictetus studied under Musings Rufus, a Roman senator, and Stoic philosopher. He eventually became a free man (but it is also unknown how and when) and taught Stoic philosophy. He fled to Nicopolis in Epirus, Greece, where he built up his very own school. He absconded to the western city of Nicopolis in Epirus, Gree where he built up his very own school. His lessons were composed and distributed by his student Arrian of Nicomedia in the work Discourses, which included four books planned to catch the significant Stoic lessons on carrying on with a decent life. Epictetus accepted that way of thinking is a lifestyle and not only a scholastic control. He additionally imagined that every single outer occasion is controlled by destiny and are outside our ability to control we ought to acknowledge whatever happens serenely and impartially. In any case, he contended that people are in charge of their very own conduct, which they can watch and control through intensive discretion. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus (April 121 BC — March 180 BC) Otherwise called Marcus Aurelius, he was the Roman Emperor from March 8, 161 CE to March 17, 180 BC. He moved toward becoming co ruler with his child, Aurelius Commodus from 177 CE until his passing in 180 CE. He was the remainder of the alleged "Five Good Emperors," a progression of kind pioneers who exhibit limitation and equity in their activities. Since quite a bit of his rule was set apart by military clash, Marcus discovered solace in the Stoic way of thinking. He composed the celebrated Stoic journal "The Meditations" in Greek while on a battle between 170 CE and 180 CE as a personal journal of philosophical reflection. Known as a philosopher king inside his lifetime and after his demise, his philosophical compositions are as yet venerated as a literary landmark to the philosophy of Stoicism. Prominent Modern Stoics These people popularized modern stoicism and act as its chief interpreters for the general public. They’re not Stoic Scholars, they’re Stoic “influencers” and practitioners. Ryan Holiday Born on June 16, 1987, Ryan Holiday is a 32 year old American author, marketer, and business person. He works as a media strategist; some of his famous clients include Dov Charney and Tucker Max. Subsequent to dropping out of school at age nineteen, he apprenticed under the strategist and writer Robert Greene, whose books highlight Stoic philosophy. He proceeded to turn into the Director of Marketing at American Apparel, a media feature writer, and the New York Observer’s director at large. Massimo Pigliucci Massimo Pigliucci is an author and the online magazine’s Scientia Salon director in chief. He is also currently a philosophy professor at CUNY City College. He is a candid pundit of creationism and pseudoscience and an advocate for secularism and science educator. In 2015, he wrote a popular piece in the New York Times on Stoicism which ended up as one of the most shared and viewed articles on the site. Donald Robertson Not to be mistaken for the Esteé Lauder Companies' creative director of a similar name, the cognitive behavioral psychotherapist and trainer spend significant time treating anxiety through the utilization of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). As the son of a Freemason, his father’s interest in mysticism inspired him to study Eastern religions such as Taoism, Hinduism, and Buddhism during his teens. The latter of which has a remarkably similar philosophy to Stoicism. He is the writer of "Stoicism and the Art of Happiness," "The Philosophy of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: Stoic Philosophy as Rational and Cognitive Psychotherapy" and his most recent book, "How to Think Like a Roman Emperor: The Stoic Philosophy of Marcus Aurelius”. Chris Fischer A former U.S. Marine, Chris Fischer was introduced with the military variant of Stoicism while serving in the Marine Corps Presidential Helicopter Squadron. After the military, he came back to public service as a law requirement officer and began to study Stoicism seriously in early 2011. At present, he fills in as a detective for a huge law enforcement agency in Florida. He is the host of The Stoicism on Fire podcast and fills in as a guide and mentor at The College of Stoic Philosophers, an open Internet school that encourages a lifelong pursuit of Stoic philosophy and love of wisdom. Lawrence Baker Perhaps the only person that can lay claim to being the closest to a true modern Stoic scholar, Lawrence Baker is as of now a Fellow of Hollins University, where he taught philosophy from 1965 to 1989. His immense contributions to academic philosophy includes where he instructed from 1965 to 1989; the associate editor of the journal Ethics from 1985 to 2000; He became co editor of two editions of the Encyclopedia of Ethics; and he created the book, A New Stoicism a book went for responding to philosophical inquiries, reflecting into a portion of his scholastic papers, the exercises he gained from many years of teaching philosophy, and his favorite Stoic quotes. Chapter 4 The Stoic Happiness Triangle his phrase describes the balance of personal virtues, which maintain a blissful state of life in the whole of humanity. Your stoicism is your resilience factor to the harsh circumstances that you encounter in your life. These virtues form the principles that you need to incorporate in your life to achieve this so called state of stoic happiness. In this state of stoic joy, you can maintain a state of joy, contentment, and fulfillment with your life despite outside influence. These virtues are in the form of a triangle based on the number of your main principles. You have three principles that form the three corners of your triangle. Your triangle also encompasses an eventual state of happiness called Eudaimonia. For your triangle to maintain itself and achieve Eudaimonia, you need to have a balance in all the three principles in your life. Your main principles that form the triangle are: 1. Living your life with aréte 2. You are focusing on what you can control 3. You are taking responsibility for your life 4. You have attained Eudaimonia, which is your ultimate objective The first three principles that form the corners of your stoic happiness triangle are interdependent. Stoicism dictates that your primary policy should focus on things that you can control. These things under your control give you the option to exercise your judgment or take appropriate action. When you choose to make a judgment, you are forming a response to a particular situation outside your control. This judgment results in your need to take responsibility for the effects of your decision. Your other option is concerning the things you can control. You voluntarily choose to take action in this scenario. Your responses should be appropriate to enable you to achieve a better version of yourself. You will get rid of your untoward behavioral aspects and develop better character traits. Your result will be attaining your ideal self identity. All these lifestyle alterations lead you to live with aréte. Once all three of your principles are in harmony, you achieve your state of Eudaimonia. You must understand that your stoic happiness triangle represents a process and not your how to guide to a particular tangible end product. Your life is a continuous process in existence, and so is your Eudaimonia. You will lead a thriving and accomplished life for as long as you maintain a balance in your principles stated above. Eudaimonia Eudaimonia is an ancient Greek philosophical descriptive terminology that you can find in the study or research on virtue ethics. You could simplify this description into always living your happiest life. You are constantly in good spirits every day. It is slightly different from the definition of happiness. Eudaimonia describes your overall standard of joy with your life based on how well you live it. It is a real term and is independent of any outside influence or various interpretations. Eudaimonia is a virtuous state of your mind and body that results from conducting your life morally and ethically. You get a feeling of contentment with your life at all times. Eudaimonia is not limited to a particular instance in time, but your state of mind is in fulfillment at all times. However, happiness per se is the emotional state you experience that gives you a feeling of joy at a specific time. Satisfaction is a subjective emotion and depends on what brings your reactions or responses of pleasure and delight explicitly. Since this emotion is personal, your definition of happiness will differ from one person to another. Your satisfaction is fleeting, but your Eudaimonia is life long if you maintain it appropriately. Furthermore, your Eudaimonia is akin to a state of stoic happiness in your life. This state results from maintaining a balance in your core principles. These principles are living with aréte, taking responsibility and focus on what you control. As earlier explained, Eudaimonia depends on your continual virtuous process. Live with arête This phrase describes being at your best mannered self at a particular moment in time. Your moments eventually comprise your lifetime. Your living with aréte will let you be the best person you can always be in your life. This principle often leads you to live a happy life and even possibly, achieve your Eudaimonia. First, you need to identify and embrace your character's shortcomings. Only then can you start working towards improving yourself to become your best version at all times. You need to determine what your ideal self looks like and how they conduct themselves. Now, thoroughly examine yourself and compare your current self to your perfect person. Identify the gaps that will invariably exist between the two versions. These gaps are the shortcomings that you need to eliminate by adjusting yourself to an aréte lifestyle. This difference in your idealization target is very amenable. Your specific faults represent a failure or deficiency in your behavior or character trait. Your traits are behavioral, and you can adjust yours for the better. Remember that you must always strive to close that gap to become a better person eventually. The following four cardinal virtues are typical in a reasonable person: 1. You have courage You need to identify your best and most appropriate response to a situation that causes you to fear. You can consider yourself courageous when you have this ability to face your source of fright and effectively tackle it in response. To achieve courage, you need to have self confidence, persistence, and bravery within yourself. 2. You have wisdom Wisdom dictates that you fully appreciate an issue or situation. In addition, in response, you equally understand how to react accordingly. Your character traits that will indicate your level of wisdom are your proper sense of perception, self reflection, and exercising excellent judgment. 3. You have Self discipline Your self discipline is your ability to disregard emotional influence when you are coming up with an appropriate course of action. Your self discipline requires proper organization, prior planning, and self control. Psychological influences that will challenge your self discipline are often in the form of your affection, preference, hatred, resistance, lust, and desire. 4. You are just in your judgments This virtue is your sense of justice. You know how to act appropriately with other people. Justice determines your ability to discern what someone deserves for his or her corresponding action. To have judgment, you will need to possess a high level of integrity, sound judgment, and a sense of fairness or neutrality. When you manage to attain these cardinal virtues, then you will be closer to narrowing the gap to your ideal self. The character traits that make up the cardinal virtues are highly essential in your life. You need the features to consider yourself as aréte since you will be closer to living your ideal life. You must always keep in mind that your actions and behavior are what gives a person their value. To be the right person, you also need to have impeccable character and consideration towards others. The opinions and views of your society towards you will become positive. As a result, you will get respect, and your self perception will get a significant boost. Your moral progress is an essential concept within aréte. Your progress will inevitably face various massive challenges on your way to becoming your ideal person. You must learn to identify these potential loopholes, which may trap you and derail your progress towards aréte. If you are not careful, once you have fallen into one of these traps, it then becomes almost impossible for you to resume your moral progression. Your resentment toward the potential prospect of starting all over again will sink your morale and spirits. As a result, you end up falling more in depth into this moral quagmire. Therefore, you must be on the lookout for these minefields. Your appropriate response to these obstacles is to sidestep intelligently or to avoid them entirely. For your benefit, a couple of scenarios will demonstrate the cruelty of your potential moral traps in these succeeding cases. Your deficiency or lack of wisdom is foolish, as you are incapable of comprehension. However, you have a chance to change this negative view by learning virtues and applying them in your everyday life. Your irrational fear of a future that is unknown leads to constant worry. Your agonizing concern over such unknowns that are not within your control is worthless. Your bravery subsides, and you may lose your courageous virtue. You are human, and your attention is prone to potential diversion by moral temptations. You can lose your self discipline when lust and other desires of the flesh overcome your sense of logic. You should always let your brain guide your reasoning, but not your emotions. Your vested interest in an issue under your determination may impair your judgment. Your neutrality becomes non existent in this particular scenario. Your ability to exercise fairness is compromised. Your sense of justice skews due to your perceived bias for or against a given position. Besides, to conduct this lifestyle effectively, you will have to be mindful of others and yourself. You need to be aware of what you are doing and where you are doing it. Ask yourself, is whatever you are doing appropriate? The self awareness to ask yourself such a question is an indication of your mindfulness. You may be put off by the misplaced perception that this principle will require a lot out of you. For instance, you feel the need to be in a constant state of alertness and on the lookout for mistakes or errors. An aréte lifestyle does not have to be this way, not at all. Once you master the art of living with aréte, these factors will become second nature to you. Soon enough, you will subconsciously find yourself exhibiting good virtues without any prompting or self consciousness. All these small changes towards improving your lifestyle will go a long way towards attaining your stoic happiness. You should always strive to conduct yourself with the highest and acceptable moral and ethical standards to consider yourself as living with aréte. Focus on what you control While you are in pursuit of stoic happiness, you should consider this principle as a central component on which to focus. In life, you will realize that there are things that you can control, and other things that you cannot control. Stop wasting your time indulging in the latter, because these things are outside your sphere of influence. If you do not, then the result will be a constant state of worry on your part. You need to appreciate early enough that worrying about things that you cannot control is pointless. Learn to pay more attention to what you can effectively manage. Focus all your energy on such controllable situations. Besides, you may adjust your controlling inputs to your specific preference. If you want a happier life, focus on the issues, which will result in your happiness. Adjust yourself accordingly by controlling what will enable you to achieve this happier outcome. You should involve yourself only with things in which you can effect changes or influence. Stop your habit of constantly worrying about other people and their opinions. Your excessive concern is an expression of your psychological rejection and resistance to your reality. Why should you agonize over what you cannot control? You will find no fulfilling answer to this query. The sooner you realize how futile your anxiety is, the sooner you can get a hold of reality. You need to cease wishing for alternative facts and how things could have been. Concentrate on how the situation is at the moment and learn to face it head on. Let go of your previous expectations and meet your current reality. You cannot do much about issues that are outside your field of jurisdiction. You need to clearly distinguish the situations that are up to you from those that are not. To avoid resenting your life, accept your circumstances and move on from those issues that are beyond your reach. Your voluntary actions and your judgments are the primary examples of things that are often within your control. Your interpretation of an issue and subsequent decision constitutes your judgment. This type of analysis is subjective since it entirely depends on your understanding. Hence, your exercise of personal assessment is within your control. Your voluntary actions are physical or mental activities that constitute your conscious reaction to an issue or situation. Your voluntary actions may be responsive and considerate or reactive and rash. The choice is totally up to you since these actions are within your control. Your body is semi controllable given that your lifestyle will influence your body, but only to a certain extent. You cannot fully control your autonomic system or your specific genetic makeup. However, living with aréte is an aspect of your life that you can control. You have all the power to choose how you want to live your life. Most other things only experience your influence and its effects. In this case, you should understand the difference between your self influence and control. Your self influence over something is not synonymous with your control over the same thing. Your influence guides the general direction of your contributing factors towards your preferred outcome. Your power will determine the specific issue in its entirety. Once you have determined your level and ability of control, you must take appropriate actions or proper functions. These two results are the basis for your judgment and voluntary steps on what you can control. Your appropriate action is whatever responsive action you decide based on your reasoning and your intelligent persuasion. This action is often justifiable for the circumstances in which you find yourself. Your proper functions invariably lead you on a journey of self discovery. This journey results in your effort to become a better version of yourself. Your proper function will eventually result in you living with arête. You have three levels of influence over your surroundings: a. High level of control This influence governs your choice in exercising judgment and your voluntary action. b. Partial influence This influence factors in your character traits, material possessions, and relationship with other people. c. No influence You cannot do anything about your circumstances at this level. You cannot control elements of the weather, your biological makeup, or racial identity. You also do not influence external opinions. You cannot change what is in the past, but your influence can determine the type of future you will have. Remember to control what you can and forget everything outside your sphere of influence. You need to start directing your control towards achieving stoic happiness in your life. Take responsibility You must learn to take responsibility for your life. Your sense of responsibility should take over in spite of uncontrollable events in your life at all times. Your reaction to your surroundings is essential. Your response to things outside of your control is vital as well. Taking responsibility for your life enables you to make the best judgment about specific situations in the course of your life. No one should ever influence your decisions, especially about your own life. This life is yours to do with if what you feel is right for you, and not those others. You are the only one who has to live your life every day. The consequences of any of your actions or inaction will affect you more than others. A life of happiness or depression is typically the result of how you judge and respond to specific situations. When you exercise responsibility, then straight away, whatever happens around you does not matter anymore. You will have the intelligence to consider your appropriate response as opposed to your previous tact of reacting. In alignment with the other principles, you have the freedom to control your reaction to match with the ideal version of yourself. Remind yourself that the goodness or negativity of anything is dependent on your choice of viewpoint. In addition, you should always follow a specific event rather than trying to lead that event. In this manner, you will have ample time to step back, consider the fact, deliberate, and finally, take appropriate action. This path is the responsible way for you to handle your affairs. Furthermore, you must resist the urge to place blame and responsibility elsewhere. Stop your customary routine of blaming others for things that are clearly within your control. Taking responsibility also involves that you can admit to making a mistake or error in your judgment. Instead of assigning guilt somewhere else, you have an opportunity to learn from your mistakes. In addition, you should realize that outside events do not have access to your mind, therefore, only you are responsible for your life. Your emotions that are in response to external circumstances are from within yourself. You are the one who can control them, not others. When you are frustrated by your supervisor or gloomy due to wet weather, you can control how you feel. The causes of your specific emotional state are outside events, and therefore, have no access to your mind. In this case, remember that how you view a particular situation matters to either its positivity or negativity. Your choice to consider these two situations from a negative viewpoint contributes to your negative response (frustration and gloom). Only you can be responsible for how you respond to these outside events. You should beware of developing irrational judgment, which may mislead you in your appropriate response. Your irrational understanding will typically affect your perceived emotional states, both current and future states. For instance, your present pleasure and future appetite are emotions that are prone to your irrational good judgment. However, your present distress and next fear receive your irrational lousy understanding. Responsible decisions should guide you at all times. Acknowledge your missteps, retrace your moves, and adjust accordingly. When you transform this exercise into your daily habit, you will soon attain the stoicism that you deserve. Chapter 5 Stoic Practices Stoic practices center around the fact that the world is unpredictable and people should tune their minds and behavior to view it as such. Stoicism also calls for people to cultivate good virtues despite all the vices in the world. . toicism, a philosophy of life, began as early as the 3rd Century BC. There were three philosophers known for famously practicing stoicism; Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. Seneca was a wealthy power broker and writer; Epictetus was a slave while Marcus was a powerful Roman Emperor. Spiritual Exercises by Seneca from Seneca’s Consolations 1. Practice misfortune Seneca had a great deal of wealth but encouraged people to practice being poor. He stresses that people should not try to visualize poverty but instead, they should get away from the comfort of their homes, go out into the streets, and learn what being poor is. Once a person comes face to face with whatever they dread, they may not find it as bad as they thought it was. They are also likely not to feel shaken if by some chance misfortune befalls on them. 2. Keep a journal All three famous philosophers; Epictetus, Marcus, and Seneca had a habit of journaling. Seneca would do it in the evening just before going to bed. He would recall everything he did during the day including the words that he had spoken. Since he could not keep any secrets from himself, he noted every tiny little detail of his day. After completing the exercise, Seneca says he would sleep the sweetest sleep. What stoic material is available today is because people took the time to write down their thoughts. Journaling is important as makes people reflect on their day and what they have learned, and enables them to also put what they have noted to constant practice. 3. Practice Negative visualization Negative visualization looks at the possible worst thing that could happen thus preparing a person accordingly. All three philosophers seemed to agree that people should be prepared for the inevitable setbacks or situations in life be it death, unforeseen changes, or external factors. Seneca would anticipate the worst case scenarios by noting down all the possible things that could happen when he was, for example, traveling. He would consider the possibility of the ship he was traveling in being taken over by pirates or the possibility of encountering a storm while at sea or the possibility that the captain of the ship could become ill and be able to control the ship. This way, Seneca was always prepared for any disruption. 4. Fight egos People who are egoistic cannot learn and progress because they believe that they are already excellent. Their blown up self esteem hinders them from learning and growing. Therefore, Seneca not only advises people to fight their egos but to also fight flattery that is undeserved and refuse praise that describes the complete opposite of what a person is. He encourages people to accept accolades that are given moderately and warns people against fraternizing with people who only know how to give false praise. 5. Choose a role model Having a role model is critical in life as pointed out by Seneca. A good role model provides a standard by which a person can live by and acts as a ruler to help straighten what is crooked. The role model can also provide guidance in dealing with difficult situations or circumstances. Seneca says that this person can be someone whose way of living and words that they speak pleases you, or it can be a person who matches their character to their faces. 6. Never be a slave of your wealth Seneca was a master of his wealth. He loved and enjoyed being rich but had also learned how to use his wealth as well as how to live without it. He advises people not to be too protective of their fortune that they develop a fear of losing it. People who act in such a manner are said to be salves of their wealth and are far from being wise men. A wise wealthy man enjoys having his wealth but does not love it to the point that it controls him. He also enjoys having wealth in his house but not in his heart. The wise will also continue gathering as much wealth as he can and continue to put his virtues into practice with it. 7. Accept fate Stoics only give attention to that which they can control and leave things like fate to its own will. They use the analogy of a dog tied to a moving cart to show how not accepting fate can make life hard. A wise man who loves his fate is compared to a playful dog that runs alongside a moving cart at whichever pace the cart is being driven at. A foolish man, on the other hand, is likened to a dog that refuses to move while the cart is in motion. No matter how much it does not want to move, it will still be dragged along. In the same way, people should accept whatever fate befalls them without complaining. Rather than try to change the reality of situations, people should accept life and enjoy the journey as much as they can. Those who choose to fight their fate will only end up miserable. Spiritual exercises from Epictetus’ Enchiridion 1. Manage impressions Epictetus encourages people to examine their impressions, impressions being a person’s response to what they hear from people, other people’s behavior, and occurrences in their life. He continues to explain that people should use their logic rather than emotions to assess and deliberate situations. If a situation is within their control, then they should do whatever they need to do. However, if a situation is beyond their control then they should not concern themselves with it. 2. Accept that people and things are impermanent Many emperors at the time Epictetus was writing about this philosophy had lost their children and other dear ones to war and diseases. By reminding themselves that people were mortal, the emperors, and people, in general, were in a way anticipating their inevitable loss. Sentimental objects were also treated in a similar manner. When they broke or got lost, a person would accept his or her loss and move on. 3. Consider the force of nature Epictetus also seeks to remind people that they should take into consideration external factors when planning for anything. According to him, many external things beyond a person’s control can affect the outcome of what a person sets out to do so people should anticipate them. 4. Put your virtues to test Stoics should put their virtues to practice every single opportunity that they get. For example, a man or woman can only exercise self restraint the moment they encounter a beautiful woman or a handsome man. Epictetus also gives an example of discovering endurance, especially when faced with pain. 5. Pause before reacting In addition to people examining their impressions, they should also take a moment before reacting to a situation. According to Enchiridion XX, this ensures that the person is able to maintain control of the situation. The pause also serves to give a person the opportunity to formulate a more objective reaction to a situation. 6. Other izing Other izing shows people how they tend to react differently to a situation especially if it affects them. People tend to be more pitiful of their circumstances and less pitiful of their neighbors in the same circumstance. For example, a person may be more upset when they lose a loved one and more self pitiful to their situation. They might not show as much concern when it is a friend suffering through the same predicament. 7. Speak less and listen more Epictetus says that people should strive to speak less a good percentage of the time and when they speak, they should only talk of that which is necessary and keep their statements brief. They should not talk about common things such as horses, sports, and food neither should they speak about other people whether it is praising or gossiping them. In Enchiridion XX XIII.14, Epictetus also discourages people from talking about their deeds and adventures. He points out that other people do not necessarily enjoy listening to other people’s achievements as much as they enjoy listening to their own achievements. 8. Choose friends wisely The kind of company a person keeps affects them significantly, and this is something even ancient philosophers understood all too well. Epictetus, for instance, warned philosophers of the dangers of mixing with non philosophers and clean people mixing with dirty people. 9. Take insults lightly As hard as this can be for some people, Epictetus believed that humor was one of the best ways of dealing with insults. Rather than get upset and try to defend yourself, he encouraged people to respond to insults with self deprecation. This would likely make the abuser embarrassed and save a person from responding in a similar manner as you abuser. 10. Do not be too hasty in judging Just because a person drinks too much, Epictetus warns that a person should not assume that they drink badly instead, the person should first understand why a person does what he does before condemning them to a behavior. Spiritual exercises from Marcus Aurelius’ Meditations 1. Cooperate with others People should learn to exist with one another as seen in Meditation II.1. Marcus continues to explain this by saying that when a stoic encounters people who are arrogant, envious, ungrateful, or vile in any way, he should ignore their behavior and continue to cooperate with them. He should not think of taking action against them, as it would be wrong and because people act in ill mannered ways out of ignorance of what is good and what is evil. 2. Have your principles at hand A stoic should have his tools ready just as a doctor is always prepared to treat a patient with his or her tools when the need arises. In the same way, human beings should have material that reminds them of what matters in life and what they need to do to strengthen unity among them and the divines. 3. Have a purpose According to Meditation IV. 2, people should live life with a purpose. Marcus knows that is in the nature of human beings to do so he only seeks to remind them to question why they choose what it is that they do constantly. 4. Renounce wealth In Meditations, V.15 Marcus talks about how a man should train himself to do without material possessions and otherworldly things. This way, he can do without them when he loses them. A man who takes part in this exercise is always grateful for what he has. 5. Acknowledging other people’s good Stoics encourage people to delight themselves in the good of other people. People should appreciate good virtues, modest behavior, and admirable qualities in the people that surround them. They should also put what they see as good behavior to practice or use such people as role models. 6. Understand other people’s perspective Meditations VII.26 reminds people that they should make a habit of looking at things from other people’s perspectives before reacting or passing judgment. It is only after doing so, that a person can understand why the other party behaved the way they did or did what they did. 7. Take a view from above This is another good exercise for the stoics. It involves looking at a situation from other angles in order to gain a better perspective of it. One such angle is forming an image of the situation with the whole world in mind. Suddenly, the stressful situation will begin to appear trivial and useless. 8. Change and death are inevitable Similar to Epictetus who believed in the impermanence of things including human beings, Marcus also believed that death was imminent. In addition to this, he also wrote that change is unavoidable and people should always be ready for it and be ready to adjust accordingly. Since the two are also inevitable, people should not focus too much on them, instead, they should concentrate on the present and their purpose in life. 9. Check the spec in your eye When a person offends you, Marcus’s Meditations says that you must first look at yourself and check to see whether you have done any wrong before reacting, confronting, or judging other people. 10. Morning reflection Marcus believed that a man ought to examine himself every day to align himself with his purpose in the universe. He suggests that a man should pick a spot where he can see the sun rising and take a moment to reflect on his life. Stoic Practices to Apply Today Some stoic practices are still applicable today. A number of people live by some of the stoic principles without even realizing it because some of the behaviors that stoics practice are acceptable by different cultures across the world. They also make common sense to a majority of people. 1. Managing impressions Managing our reaction to events is very important in life. This stoic principle teaches human beings to recognize that which they can change and that which they cannot. For example, if a flight delays due to bad weather, this principle teaches that a person ought not to get upset over the situation, stress about it, or react to it by shouting at the airline crew. On the contrary, the person should patiently wait for the situation to change or accept their outcome. Living by this decision can make you live a happier stress free life. 2. Keeping a journal Keeping a journal can be very therapeutic. By noting down the events of the day, a person can reflect on the things he or she was able to accomplish and the things he or she learned. A person can also refer to the same entries for wisdom. Writing and reading lessons on a day to day basis as opposed to just listening to words of wisdom, you change to a better person. You can also monitor your progress and appreciate your old way of thinking. 3. Having a role model Today, many people follow influential people they admire and look up to for guidance. A role model can be any person such as a parent, a leader, a friend, a celebrity, a relative, or a colleague that you admire. In the face of a difficult situation, a person can look up to their role model and ask what he or she would do. Once they answer this question, they can proceed to act in the same way and overcome their problem. 4. Negative visualization Negative visualization can also be applied in today’s world. For example, if a person has a presentation to carry out, they can think of all the possible things that could go wrong and anticipate what to do in the event that something actually goes wrong. This way they are not caught unaware and are able to have an easier time accepting whatever fate befalls them. Negative visualization can be scary to some people, so people are normally at free will to decide on their potential catastrophes. You can make it also a fun exercise. You can even involve other people in your life. For example, you can ask your partner or spouse to imagine with you where both of you would be if you had not met one another. 5. Practicing poverty Practicing poverty is also possible. A person can decide to sleep on the floor occasionally to get a better feel of how they would cope in the event their home and bed were to be taken away. This exercise also serves to remind people to be grateful for the things that they have. 6. Testing virtues People should always put their virtues to test. One way they can do this is to test their endurance to pain or their endurance through difficult situations. A person can start by first imagining about any difficult situations that they may encounter, then arm themselves with the necessary tools to overcome any overwhelming feelings. At the end of the difficult period, they can mentally check to see how they dealt with the situation and what most helped them to overcome their problem. 7. Accepting fate Stoic practices teach people that they should accept their fate no matter what it is so that they can continue to enjoy life’s journey rather than be dragged along. Whatever circumstances you are in should not dampen your spirit; you should accept them and move on with your life. Remaining fixated on that, which you have no control over, only leaves you feeling more miserable. 8. Having morning reflections Having early morning reflections is important. You can start by being thankful for the fact that you have seen another day. You can then go ahead to plan your day noting down how you are going to put your virtues to test as well, as to how you will avoid vices. You can decide on how you are going to react to the events of the day as well as other people’s behavior. 9. Having evening reflections Bedtime reflection is just as important as the moming reflection. It is an opportunity to reflect on what you have done throughout the day and to check on whether you lived up to the expectations you set out for yourself. You can note down how you cultivated your virtues and what vices you overcame throughout the day. Anything that was not achieved during that particular day can be pushed to the next day for action. 10. Taking a bird’s view In today’s world, it is important to take a step back and look at the bigger picture by relating yourself and your circumstances to the world. It is interesting how most things will appear less important and minute when looked at from this angle. Guided meditation can be an excellent way of achieving such a perspective. Chapter 6 Important Ideas in Stoicism ancient Greco Roman philosophy of Stoicism naturally evolved over time. Stoic beliefs morphed throughout the three phases of its history: Early Stoa, Middle Stoa, and Late Stoa. Most of what we know about Stoicism comes from the philosophers of the Late Stoa since only the works of that period survived antiquity. Jen like religions, the concepts within any philosophy, including the The Stoic Egg The ancient Stoic philosophers believed that practical ethics was the most indispensable part of their way of thinking. To practice ethics was to carry on with a real existence in the most ideal manner conceivable. In any case, they likewise believed that it is trying to create suitable morals without two different segments: the comprehension of how the world capacities and esteeming the power and cutoff purposes of human reasoning. In a nutshell, they believed that Stoicism was made of three regions of study: “logic,” “ethics,” and “physics.” The Stoics used several metaphors to explain how they thought of this philosophical inquiry. The most popular is that of an egg. I want you to think of a hard boiled egg. Imagine its shell, yellow yolk, and white albumen (or egg whites; it’s the glossy liquid inside that lightens and puffs up dessert recipes like meringues and mousses, when whisked). The shell corresponds to what the Stoics called “logic”; the albumen for “ethics”; and the yolk corresponds to “physics.” An egg was the perfect metaphor to illustrate how the different parts of philosophy are interdependent and should not be studied by itself. Henceforward the egg: ethics hovers in between the hard shell of logic and the soft core of “physics.” The Egg Shell for “Logic” The shell corresponds to what the Stoics called “logic.” Nowadays, this term is better understood as the study of reason or the theory of knowledge. The Stoic study of “logic? encompassed rhetoric, epistemology, psychology, and all related social sciences. They believed that knowledge can be attained by reason and the seemingly modern idea that knowledge can be accomplished distinctly by subject skill to aggregate judgment. Stoic logic encompasses the investigation of rationale as we barely comprehend it these days, in addition, to talking, epistemology just as brain science and related sociologies. The Stoics developed an arrangement of logic alternative in contrast to that of Aristotle, which was to a great extent overlooked all through the medieval times and beyond. It started to be acknowledged again with the cutting edge approach of propositional logic or sentimental logic. The Albumen for “Ethics” The albumen or egg whites corresponds to “ethics.” For the ancient Greeks and Romans, ethics didn’t only refer to the study of right and wrong. It also encompasses a more broad knowledge of what kind of life you want to live and the society you want to build. The Yolk for “Physics” The yolk corresponds to “physics,” which was once called natural philosophy. Nowadays, the term natural philosophy is really a combination of natural and social sciences, in addition to the subject of metaphysics. Stoic physics incorporated the cosmological thought that the universe started in a pneuma (Greek: nve Õ pa) or "breath of life". This inestimable cosmic fire began life and the universe and will annihilate both life and the universe a similar way, just to start once more. Ethics and Practical Philosophy There is a confusion that Stoicism is tied in with quelling or smothering your feelings and experiencing existence with a hardened upper life. Also, no, Mr. Spock, the fictional character in Star Trek, was not a Stoic. Gene Rodenberry, the actor who played the role, certainly incorporated some aspects of Stoicism into the character but Mr. Spock had traits that are un Stoic. Epictetus himself cautioned, “For I should not be unfeeling like a statue”. The ancient Stoics were nothing like the Vulcan Mr. Spock; they’re not in any way interested in completely purging themselves of emotion. Instead, the Stoics taught to transform destructive emotions and harness positive emotions to achieve inner calm. In more specific terms, the Stoics wanted us to recognize propathos (natural response) and eupathos (emotions coming about because of a right judgment). To feel emotions such as fear, anger, or love are part of human nature; it’s instinctive to show human responses in specific circumstances. Keep in mind, the feeling can't be maintained a strategic distance from. In any case, intelligent personality can remove itself from crude and unhelpful emotions. We can contemplate whether the emotion we’re feeling should be accepted, cultivated, or avoided. The ultimate goals were to accomplish apatheia, which comes about from practicing clear judgment keeping up poise throughout everyday life. The ancient Stoics put stock in the idea of eudaimonia (often translated as “flourishing”) happiness, fulfillment, or the good life. This is attained by cultivating moral virtues that’ll help you become a good person. These moral virtues are wisdom, courage, justice, and temperance. The Four Cardinal Virtues of Greek Philosophy The four cardinal virtues professed by the Stoics were: Wisdom, Courage, Justice, and Temperance. Its origins are unknown. Most researchers and scholars of ancient history agree that the ideas around these four cardinal virtues are from the time of Plato or Socrates, most likely much further. If you’ve ever taken a philosophy class in college, you’ll notice conflicting definitions of Greek philosophical terms one textbook says this, the other States that, but my professor describes it differently. This is common in the study of philosophy. People often have differing explanations, descriptions, or definitions of Greek philosophical terms. This has caused so much confusion, speculation, and debate among philosophy students throughout millennia. Astoundingly, we have a Greek philosophical dictionary that survived antiquity. The book is called Definitions (Greek: “O poi Horoi), which is believed to be written by Speusippus, one of Plato’s students. Definitions were obviously written for the followers of Platonism, not Stoicism. There are no surviving writings regarding the Stoic meanings of the cardinal virtues, anyway knowing how Platonists described theirs surely helps us. The following are the four cardinal ideals of the Greek way of thinking: Wisdom, Courage, Justice, and Temperance; and my personal take on each. Don’t worry if you don’t understand it at first. The cardinal virtues and Greek philosophical terms can be quite confusing and require a bit of deconstructing, construing, or “reading between the lines” to make sense of. Prudence or Wisdom (Phronésis ôr sophia) (Greek: opovioic; oogia) Prudence or wisdom is maybe the most significant and most broad of the cardinal virtues since it alludes to the immovably got a handle on the information of what is great, awful, and uninterested throughout everyday life. In reality, all the cardinal virtues can be comprehended as insight connected to our activities or good wisdom. Basically, the value of prudence is the comprehension of the most significant things throughout everyday life or getting a handle on the estimation of things objectively. The opposite of it is ignorance. For the Stoics, prudence is the act of immovably getting a handle on the nature of good: understanding that wisdom or prudence is the main veritable good. Thusly, it is immovably related to the importance of love of wisdom or “philosophy.” Prudence can also refer to our ability to discern the value of different external things rationally, a concept the Stoics called axia (Greek: a € 1a). When we decide between two seemingly essential things, for example, contemplating whether to prioritize our health or wealth, we are in essence practicing axis; thus, we’re exercising prudence or wisdom. As I've discussed, the old Stoics separated their syllabus into Logic, Ethics, and Physics. The ancient Stoic philosophers may have related sensibility with the subject of Stoic Logic, which consolidates intellectual inquiry into and epistemology. It may also be related to Epictetus’ practice called the Discipline of Assent, which concerns our ability to sanction, or not, on our “impressions.” For example, I hear a loud sound outside my window. I may jump in autonomic reaction or immediately grab hold of the nearest self defense weapon I can find, reflecting my sudden fear. However, after using my “ruling faculty” to conduct a rational examination, I discover that it was merely a stray cat rummaging through my metal trash can. Courage or Fortitude (Andreia ôr fortitudo) (Greek: å vépeta, X0€voc) This is one of the easiest virtues to understand. Courage or fortitude clearly means just that the act of bravery or valor. But the Stoics also extends its meaning to incorporate continuance of agony and distress. It is something contrary to timidity or cowardice. This virtue combines well with the virtue of moderation. The two of them allude to the mastering our passions, directing our desires, and to confront our feelings of dread head on. The two of which correspond with Epictetus' celebrated proverb: endure and renounce. The virtue of fortitude or courage grants us to experience dread, what's more, the virtue of moderation empowers us to deny unwanted wants. Seneca accepted that these virtues can't exist without some hint of dread and desire to master. The Stoics even demand that the most astute among us requires fearlessness and balance since the person is as yet powerless against the first developments of passions or "proto passions." This is known as Propatheiai, which is our instinctive reaction to events. For instance, I may look at an attractive woman and suddenly have the impression of lust. If I “assent” or act upon my propatheiai, then I develop a desire to get in bed with her. Stobaeus, the fifth century compiler treasured series, and extracts from Greek authors once commented that the ancient Stoics characterized fearlessness or guts as the "information of what is awful, what isn't horrendous, and what is not one or the other." As one of four cardinal virtues of Stoicism, mental fortitude is critical on the grounds that it is simply the capacity to apply notwithstanding hazard. As indicated by Aristotle, the highest risk was death and that the most courageous man was the one that acted bravely notwithstanding it. Remember, fear is and will always be present. We all fear something. But the brave person does not feel less dread than the coward. What separates him or her is the ability to act in spite of fear. To be able to muster up the nerve to face adversity head on is what makes that person courageous. Temperance (Sophrosyneé) (Greek: o@@poovvn) The virtue of temperance alludes to moderation, self restraint, or self control. It likewise identifies with mindfulness or acting naturally had. It is firmly connected to the cutting edge idea of "care." something contrary to restraint is wantonness or salacity. As indicated by Stobaeus, the ancient Stoics accepted that the ethicalness of moderation involves learning of "what is to be picked, maintained a strategic distance from, and neither one of its". directs our expectations to follow up on specific driving forces or wants. Diogenes Laërtius composed that the Stoic scholars, eminently Chrysippus, characterized moderation fundamentally as good self discipline (eutaxia, Greek: E ò tag i a) and propriety (kosmistés, Greek: kxoopótnta). By viewing enters in a detached way, like how a philosophical thinker or physicians see the world, the ancient Stoics meant to accomplish a target portrayal of themselves, suspending any positive or negative decisions or inclinations. This disposes of or possibly diminish dread or want. As it were, it is like the cutting edge thought of objectivity and scientific detachment. The Stoics practiced temperance as an approach to transcend their feelings of trepidation and wants and accomplish apatheia or opportunity from undesirable interests and connections to external things. Justice (Dikaiosuné) (Greek: 5uxa.oovvn) The Ancient Stoics did mean justice in the authentic sense, yet what may be moral in our dealings with the most part. For example, they take it to look past a mother's frame of mind towards her kids or our feeling of devotion towards the divine beings. In the ancient past, the term equity was frequently more comprehensively deciphered as “righteousness.” The virtue of equity is chiefly made out of the subordinate temperance of decency and thoughtfulness. In spite of the fact that it might be clear, this cardinal virtue is a more extensive idea of social temperance, which references to kindheartedness, altruism, or sympathy toward others found in Stoic compositions, for the most part through Emperor Marcus Aurelius' own personal journal, The Meditations. The philosopher king himself says that justice is the most significant of ethics. The term justice or fairness was viewed mostly as good insight connected to our activities, transcendently identified with other people individually or society as a whole. The writings of Joannes Stobaeus stated that the ancient Stoics described the virtue of justice as the learning of the conveyance of appropriate an incentive to every individual. Diogenes says the Stoic philosophers divided the cardinal virtue of justice into two categories: Impartiality (isotés or aequalitas) and courtesy or kindness (eugnémosuné). It might likewise have associated with the Stoic Ethics, the learning of the dissemination of appropriate an incentive to every individual around the tenet that virtue is the only genuine good. It includes legislative issues and the connected Discipline of Action by Epictetus. Modern authors, on the other hand, would merely allude to it as morality or social virtue. The opposite of this virtue is when we are unjust or have been done morally wrong by another person. Chapter 7 The Science of Letting Go of the Past and Living in the Present et go of the past by cutting out any attachment you have especially with painful memories. The memories may be dragging you back without your knowledge. Forget about your past pains, and you Start accepting what the future has in store for you. You need to fight the past and stop letting discouragement or disappointment bring you down. Move on with life and make things sail away as they should. Release the thoughts that are built up in you, habits, fears as well as worries. Detach yourself from the past emotions that make you resentful so that you can face the future an active person. If you do not let go of the past, you will suffer bad relations, jealous as well as envy. Letting go needs you to have a determination and work daily on your life. There are things that you can involve in your daily practice so that you can leave that past behind and have a good future. They include and not limited to; Making Peace with the Past It is time that you agree that what happened at that time belongs to the past and not the future. Do not let that bring you down or tie you to an extent you cannot live a healthy future. Thinking about the bad things that have gone will not help you in any way. That will do you more harm than good. Though your mind will keep bringing back the painful memories, you need to replace them with positive ones with immediate effect. Be smart and creative to counter any negative thought that wants to remind you about what you did in the past. Teach your mind to think about a positive tomorrow when the past tries to haunt you. That will in no time become a habit, and you will eventually find yourself letting go of the range you have. You can practice mindfulness as a technique to replace the negative thoughts. When you bring your focus to the present, the past will have a lesser impact on your future. Practice living the present, and you will be hurt less and as well be in a position to control the hurt. You are free to choose the things you want in life, and you have to make a wise decision so that you can live the life of your expectations. Face your Fears Fear can be the thing that is holding you back from letting go of your past. To continue with a healthy life, you have to face your concerns as well as disappointment. Cut your connection with the fears, and you will make it in life. You have to keep trying, and eventually, you will make it. People will often have a fear of being in grief, sadness, anger, as well as disappointment. Do not shut out such feelings; instead, give them a chance to flow out of you. When you decide to fight them, you will be left stuck, and you will find it hard to move on. Do not avoid the negative emotions from the past since that will make you dwell in the past. Naturally, a person will find a means to counter any pain that will come their way. Spending most of your time trying to distract your feeling will not initiate a disconnection. Finding something which you like doing so that you will take your mind off the past will yield no fruits. You need to know that the more you do that, the more you will get hurt. Focusing on such things will only drain your energy. When you feel as if you cannot do it on your own, find someone you think will help you get over the past. Practice Being Gentle with Yourself Show yourself some compassion as well as kindness so that the past can stop tormenting you. Do not criticize yourself when you get in a painful situation. Treat yourself in the same way you would treat the person you love. If you do not love yourself, you will have a hard time fighting with the past, and that means that your future will be full of bruises. Even though the hurt is in no way inevitable, treat yourself with at most love as well as a kindness if it will come. Practice self care once you are hurt, and that will be a way of setting clear boundaries. Say no to the things that harm you and do the things that bring you joy as well as comfort you not forgetting to handle your needs first. When you learn to implement self care daily, you will empower yourself, and there will be an overwhelming feeling. Put all the focus on yourself and address the resentment built up in you. Try and bring yourself to the present any time that you feel that your thoughts the drifting toward the past. Pay attention to the things that you are grateful for and not what hurts you. Do not wait for an Apology You know you are firm when you accept an apology from someone who has wronged you, and they do not apologize. Expecting someone to apologize is the worst mistake that you will ever make. That will make you go slow in letting the past go and, in most cases, this is when that person does not care what happens to your future. Do not expect them to take care of your healing: instead, you should take care of your healing process. The pain, as well as, hurt that is built up in you doesn’t affect the person who hurt you, it affects you. Do not wait for the person to make an apology. In fact, don’t expect them to do so. When you do that, you will speed up your healing, and the quicker you will be able to let go. Work on your forgiveness since waiting for them to apologize will stall the entire process. Forgiveness is an essential thing to do since it will relieve you from the shame, anger, sadness as well as the guilt that is in you. Be Free to Talk About It When passing through the hard times, you should find someone that you can speak with them about it. When you speak it out, it will be one way to help you heal, and you will let it go. When you don't talk about it, you will never improve and dwelling in the past will hold your life back. Do not feel ashamed or feel as if it is embarrassing to talk about it to the people around you. Find someone who will be patient enough with you and willing to offer you the help they can get so that you can leave the past behind. You can as well sort for professional advice once you feel as if you have no one you can trust. When you talk to a therapist, the struggle to let go of will go decreasing, and finally, you will manage. When you come across a professional who has experience in such matters, they will guide you on how to implement the process. Practice Mindfulness Practicing mindfulness is a way to train the brain to live in the present and focus your awareness on the senses and not the thoughts. Focus your attention on the things that are happening at the moment. Leave alone what went on some time back and let it remain as history. Aim at noticing every activity that is and let the mind float without any attachment. Make it a practice, and you will get it easy to refocus your thoughts on what is going on in the present. Find a starting point and begin so that you can let go of the past. It may be a hard thing to do, but once you can practice that, you will find ideas flowing in the right direction. Create a Distance It will be of help to you if you create a gap between the person, or situation, that is continually reminding you if the past. Whatever that is making, you upset should not be anywhere close to you. It is not a bad idea to put a physical distance from the person to who is making you dwell in your past. Create a psychological range as well from any circumstance that is taking you back to the past. You need to avoid anyone that is advising you that battling with the past will not help you in any way. No one should discourage you from processing the past since it will be an excellent approach to use so that you can heal. Be Creative Creativity when it comes to real life is a way to let go of your past. When you engage your mind in creating new beginnings as well as things, you will have less time to dwell in the past. Open up your thoughts to new opportunities and do the things that will make you happy. Seek to meet new people when the ones who are with you discourage you from moving in that direction. You need to embrace change whenever it comes your way. Take a different course and guidance when things seem to make a change. It will work for you since change is as good as rest. Yearn to discover more, and that will help you to let go of the anger that you feel in you due to your past mistakes. Work with a Positive Attitude You need to create affirmative phrases that you need to keep reminding yourself once the painful past tries to find a way in you. The way you talk to yourself will determine whether you will move forward or you will still keep moving steps backward. The more you talk positively to yourself, the more you can leave the past behind. You can reframe your mind often when you practice a mantra that you will be telling yourself when you are in a painful as well as an emotional moment. Train your mind to think about the possible and not the impossible. In that way, you will move forward more efficiently and forget how the future was treating you. Bring the people that see the good in you closer. You need to as well focus on your strengths rather than your weaknesses. You need to know that both the positive and the negative experiences in your life will help shape the future. You will come across people, situations, as well as events, that will determine who you will be in the days to come. Be wise that you will not focus on the negative ones and the ones that will bring you to hurt. That will help you overcome any experience that will be similar to the one in the past. And you will not be biased. You will be hit by mental blindness in the future when you decide to focus on the negative side alone. Spending all your time in fighting impossibility at the moment will tie your spiritual resources, keeping you away from a good life. You will make a difference with the way you are going to deal with the painful past. Bear in mind that emotional pain will keep you away from healing. You need to simplify your life so that the unforeseen consequences will not hit you. Living in the past will only rob your present joy. Choose to live in the future, and you will find it exciting and have a healthy and meaningful life. Live in the present moment, and the future will have a smooth flow. When you learn how to let go of the past, seek to know how you need to live. Focus on living in the present. Leaving the past behind is not only an important thing but living the resent is a wise decision to make. Mourning the past will make you worry about the present as well as the future. It will make you always anticipate troubles, and you will have it hard to cope with life. Aim for the best, and you are going to find it enjoyable living in the present moment. Make a conscious decision and be in control of every situation celebrating every small achievement that you make. Chapter 8 How to Become Unattached To External Things etaching yourself is healthy, especially when it involves going away from toxic people. You will benefit if you disconnect from things that do not help you. Separating is a practice that should be done once you find yourself in entanglements that drag you behind. Find happiness as you disconnect yourself from unhealthy attachments using the following approaches. Know the Reason You Want to Detach Know why you need to disconnect from the attachments you have been holding on to. They are a hindrance to your success. Ask yourself in what way you are going to do it and the appropriate time to start the process. It will be hard for you to do it if you have enough reason to do that. As you seek to detach yourself, have a concrete goal that you are clinging on. The aim must be convincing to you why you need to leave a particular thing. The reason will be the one to help you each day to stay firm to disconnect yourself slowly. The goal should not stop once you get to some point in your journey. The reason should help you realize yourself even when you feel like there is no more hope. It should have a direct connection with the thing or person you intend to detach. Find the exact cause and how it is affecting you as well as the people around you. Release Let the thing that is depriving your happiness go so that you can be at peace. It will be of great help if you let it go. The longer you keep holding on to it, the more it will harden and hurt you, the more. You will end up blowing if you keep holding onto something that is not beneficial to you. Some things are toxic, and they need to be left alone. Do the things that you know will help you to let them go. You can even decide to pen down the thoughts that are pissing you off and analyze one by one and how to go about them. When you need to let go of a person, at times you might find yourself crying. If that is the only way feel that can make you release them, then you can go ahead and do it. When you learn to release someone or something, you will find the attachment you were having declining slowly with time. There are numerous ways that you can release something, but you have to make sure it will be harmless. Decide the amount of time that you will use to let go, but you should not take an eternity. The approach that will make you remain calm is the best option to use. Your harmony is the most important thing above everything else. It is all about you and the feeling that comes along with your attachment to that particular thing. Our opinions are what makes us the people we are, and no one should judge you for the way you feel. Do it Little by Little You do not have to burden yourself, all you have to do is start small, and finally, you will manage to break the attachment. Time is all that you need to perform such a big task. Do not shock yourself but instead try harder and as days go by, you will detach completely. It is not easy, but eventually, it will be possible. It is painful to detach from something or someone close to you, but if they are of no gain, you have no choice but initiate a detachment. Start with removing anything that is a constant reminder of them. You have the right to decide what you will start by eliminating. You may feel that you cannot let some things off the hook, but it is time you earn that holding on them will not help. Do not push too hard to the extent that you will tire before you are through with the entire process. When you do that, you might lose the focus and forget what you were aiming for. You will be forced to start from the first step when you lose the reason why you are pushing for the detachment. Seek as well as Look Forward Look for help as you seek a new start and living a new life. You need to have something that you are focusing on. That will serve as a motivator of going on with the process daily. As you are slowly letting go, you need to find a new thing that will always remind you that you have to keep holding on. Something to tell you that you have a better future ahead away from whatever that is distracting you. Do not dwell on pain that you felt in the past but fix your eyes on a better tomorrow. There is a sweet tomorrow before you, and that is what should motivate you to keep fighting. Imagine the joy that you will have once you manage to draw away the extemal things that are holding your success. Let the imaginations that you have the fuel you to detach as fast as you can. Do not let anyone whisper defeat because if you give the surrounding a chance to drive you, you will eventually give up. Stay positive on whatever the outcome will be, and you will find satisfaction in the whole process. As you seek something exciting, look forward to great results. Do not take Shortcuts Detaching from something will take time, and for that, you need to have a lot of patience. There are no alternative routes to use, and you have to follow the right channel so that you can get to the results you desire. There has never been an easy way to detach from something that you have been with for some time. It turns out to be difficult and painful as well. But with the time, you will realize that there isn’t much pain than holding on to someone or something that you are not worth fighting. You have to take heart and be active as you detach yourself and start the journey of reinventing yourself. Think forward and do not Look Back There are no chances for you to pull back from the journey that you are set on. All the steps that you have gone through are essential, and you cannot lose focus at this juncture. When you think of looking back, you will be killing yourself slowly, and that will mean all has been in vain. When you look back from where you started it all, you will have more reasons to give up than to continue pushing. Despite there being many reasons to give up, pushing on will result in your freedom at the end of the tough journey of detaching. When you look back, you find things that will distract you from what the present, as well as the future, has for you in store. You will not move any further when you get used to looking back. The past could hold Sweet memories, but they are things that you cannot keep holding on to forever. The past may be harboring secrets that are tormenting you in addition to fears that are needless. Do not give up your future because of the history that you do not want to let go of. You should always be thinking of good things that are about to happen once you get away from some things. You can end up having better as well as healthier attachments once you let go of the unnecessary ones. You will be a better and happy person in the end. Have the determination to achieve what is before you rather than what you already have. Learn to Forgive and Forget Forgiving is a vital thing when you want to detach from things. Do not let pride take you over because that will harm the inner you. Give no chance for pride to win the battle since that is the number one thing that will destroy everything. Pride will make you say things that you will come to regret later. It will open up fresh wounds. Forgive yourself for having involved yourself in the things that hurt you but know that it is time to detach completely. Once you forgive, you will have peace of mind and the strength to continue fighting. It will make you comfortable to know that there is nothing which is holding you back from detaching with toxic things and the environment. Forgiving may take quite some time, but it is much worth it. It will help you to separate with no traces of resentment in you. You not only have to forgive, but you will have to put it behind you. You may not be in a position to forgive and forget, but you need to make sure that once you remember that situation, there will be no pain in you. Forgiveness will take you a step ahead when it comes to cutting the attachment that you once had. Healing Wounds may take time to heal, but as time goes on, you will recover completely. The scars that you have maybe the reason why you want to disconnect so that you can heal. You can be in an attachment that is bringing you sorrow than joy. You have to cut the connection that there is so that you will stop suffering. There comes a time that you feel your wounds are, and you wonder how you are going to heal. You need to detach yourself, and they will improve with time. Do not tear yourself apart so that you retain attachments that are bringing you scars. Try to heal for your sake and not for the others. Always be Grateful Appreciate the pain as well as the sorrow that you have. The memories that come along should be something to enjoy whether good or bad. Be thankful that you have found a reason to end the attachment and move on. There are numerous things, as well as people, to be grateful. Detachment is a process, and it should be a reminder that you have to be happy without some things in life. Focus on the best side of issues, and you will have a reason to keep moving. Be grateful that the disconnection will give you a chance to look for healthier as well as beneficial attachments. You will have an opportunity to know your worth, and for that, you will learn to appreciate yourself. Move Forward The time that you have spent trying to detach yourself has been a success, and the next logical thing that you need to go is to move on with your life. The time has come for you to go forward without looking at what you have left behind. It is a chance to live a happy and healthy life away from toxic things. You have come to a great beginning, and you have to realize that and find your way forward. Coming back to your senses is the result of trying to find your worth. It is time to love the person you have become the way you should have done some time back. Face the world with courage and take one step at a time. Life is a continuous cycle, and we can mess up along the way. That does not mean that we dwell on the toxic things and forget that we have a future ahead of us. We need to detach from some things so that we can have a life that is worth celebrating. There comes a time, and we feel as if we are not going to make it. Do not forget that there is a way out of every mess that you find yourself. Take the lessons that every attachment has taught you so you can have a better tomorrow without dwelling on the past. When you feel as if you have cannot break the connection on your own, it will be good if you look for a professional to help you go through it. You will find it painful, but the pain will not go forever. Stoic Meditation Imagine a clear glass of water. If you were to place a drop of yellow pigment in it, imagine what would happen. That yellow dye would permeate and diffuse through the water. Even if you don’t stir it or shake the glass, as time passed, the dye would diffuse gradually until it occupied the entire space of water. Would it jump out of the water and occupy the air above it? No. Its universe would be the confines of the water, and it would not be able to exit its universe. Extending that same imagery, you can see that the form of that dye—that cloudy appearance of yellow permeating that water—is suspended in a medium. Without that medium, the dye would not manifest in that same way. That die owes its form to the medium that holds it. In the same way, the mind, like that yellow pigment, is predicated on a medium. When you need to access the mind’s higher level functions, you can’t do it in the same way you involve conscious functions. You have to do it by accessing the silent part of your mind—the medium in which the mind floats. The challenge most people have is to focus on that silence. Because the mind is active and its job is to throw up thoughts and concerns, you find that it is constantly making some sort of observation or alerting you to some possible thought. You have to extract yourself from paying attention to it when you need to, and then the mind will start to tune down. Think of your total mind as an echo chamber except in this case it’s perpetual, and you can stop it until you curtail at least one side of the equation. Without going into the workings of the mind too deeply, imagine blasting an echo chamber with a sound. What would happen? The chamber will bounce the sound back at you. What if you put another echo chamber across from it? The sound would echo again. It does this a couple of times and then dies down as the energy in the sound wave diminishes much like the ripple in a bucket that bounces back and forth until the energy of the ripple diminishes. Then it goes back to being calm again. That only works when the original echo chamber is passive. In the case of your mind, it is not passive. Your mind works on the principles of association. If you say one word, it will automatically (and almost magically) respond with another word, and that word will trigger another word, and that will trigger another. So, if you were to play the word association game, you will see that the mind is an endless source of seemingly random thoughts or fragments of thoughts. It is anything but random. The Mind and Intangibility The world is composed of two phenomena. The first is tangible—having, for example, shape, size, and mass. A shoe is an object, just like an apple or a car. These are tangible factors. The second phenomenon is intangible. For instance, whether the car is moving or stationary are intangible qualities. A good way to think about it is to wonder if you can take a picture of it. If you can, it’s tangible. If you have to resort to a video recording of it to show the changes it makes, then that is very likely intangible. In this case, movement and acceleration are all intangible properties. A larva’s metamorphosis into a butterfly is intangible, but the butterfly and the larva are both tangible. With respect to these kinds of tangible and intangible properties, it is the mind that can decipher them, which has to be done through contemplation. The brain creates memories of the result and stores it as part of the neural record. The mind is the only tool in a person’s arsenal that can convert intangible phenomena into tangible representations in the form of neurons. The mind has a stage that is built within it, and on that stage, it places representations of the various experiences and objects it comes in contact with. Without that representation in the mind, the objects that appear in the physical reality will seem unreal to us. On the other hand, if we have something in our mind but it is missing in the real world, we tend to overlook it at times or feel uncomfortable. Take, for instance, your home. You are completely familiar with it, and your mind has every detail of the physical space replicated and represented on this stage that it built in the mind. When you enter this place, the mind is totally at ease with the surroundings because it’s exactly as it should be. The observation the mind receives and the neurological imprint the brain has in store are identical. In fact, if the mind is not aware of an alteration in the physical world, it may even neglect to look at its surroundings carefully and might miss something that may have been moved. Alternatively, think about the first time you went to a certain place. Do you recall the feeling you had in that strange place? It’s a heightened state that will have you alert and observant. The more and more you visit that location after that, the more relaxed you start to feel, and you are no longer as alert or as observant as before. In fact, you may even take things for granted after some time. You could even close your eyes and know exactly where everything is because of that neurological imprint of your environment. The mind is not looking at your physical surroundings and making decisions directly. It is making decisions on that virtual stage built in your mind. That works for both tangible and intangible phenomena. Here is one way you can visualize that. If you’ve played tennis, you would realize that the ball is too fast for the eye to catch and respond. In fact, your mind only anticipates its location based on what it sees your opponent doing and the kind of court you are playing on. It calculates from there and allows you to react. If it gets it right, then it reaffirms the calculation it uses. If it gets it wrong, then it updates the calculations. That’s why the more you practice, the better you become. How does meditation come into this? It comes back to your physical mind. Remember that your memories are made of neurons, and each neuron is connected to other neurons by axons. Each neuron can have numerous connections—dozens, hundreds, or thousands. When you play the word association game, one word will trigger another because they have this connection between their respective neurons. It turns out that these connections are not fixed. They can be altered, and the neurons can be moved around. This is called neuroplasticity, and it specifically refers to the alteration of the layout of the neurons and the ability of the brain to alter what neurons connect to, which, in turn, results in thinking patterns that can be altered. If someone has a poor mind set in that they constantly think of bad outcomes and they associate negatively, then anytime they hear a certain trigger word or phrase or are exposed to almost anything, it will fire up a range of neurons that are destructive in nature. This comes down to a simple issue of just poor associative connections, and they can be altered by reconnecting the neurons through a process called neuroplasticity. Stoics in 300 BC didn’t know anything about scientific neuroplasticity, but they did understand the power of reconditioning the mind to improve the decision making process. That, in turn, improves outcomes. That brings us back to perception, reflection, and contemplation. When you understand reflection and contemplation, you are forced to deal with issues with the same groups of neurons firing whenever you approach a certain issue—just as you may constantly be shouting the word “shoe” each time you play the word association game when someone else shouts “brown.” Somehow in your neurological set the word “brown” is related to a brown shoe, so you respond by saying “shoe” when they say “brown.” You’re not going to always pick “shoe” because on different days the choice of the responses may jump the neurons from one step to the next or down two steps or even ten steps. The universe of possible responses is fixed by what your neurons are connected to. It can be any number of responses, but those responses can only work if they are connected. If you have “cucumber” on a different set of neuron connection, the utterance of “brown” is never going to evoke your mind to respond with “cucumber.” Think of your different neuron sets as a multiverse of possible neuron bunches. It’s easier to think of them in binary terms about whether or not each bunch is connected. In reality, it comes down to how many connections exist in the brain. All bunches are connected with at least one connection. If they are not connected, the probability of getting to that memory drops to exactly zero. If you want the simple explanation, then just think of them in the multiverse. The higher the number of connections emanating from a neuron, the greater the chance that that neuron will be invoked. If you look at an MRI of a brain during its regular activity, you will see flashes of energy around areas of activity. These flashes seem random but are not. They gravitate in waves of associated neurons. When these neurons fire, they trigger the neurons they are connected to, which means that when you have an idea or are subjected to a specific event, you will always have the same associative thought that triggers in its wake. The only way to change that is through cognitive conditioning and neuroplasticity. This is where meditation applies. When you meditate, the neurons are moved around and aligned in a more efficient arrangement. What you find is that one event triggers a different set of thoughts and responses than it did before the relocation of the neuron. The more you meditate, reflect, and contemplate, these neurons arrange themselves in a better formation, and you are destined to have better cognitive outcomes. The Stoics during Zeno’s time did not come close to knowing the neuroplasticity effects of meditation. What they did know was that there were positive effects from it. It altered the way they thought, and when the altered thinking sequence yielded better outcomes, the positive reinforcement solidified the change. Chapter 9 Stoic Meditation magine a clear glass of water. If you were to place a drop of yellow pigment in it, imagine what would happen. That yellow dye would permeate and diffuse through the water. Even if you don’t stir it or shake the glass, as time passed, the dye would diffuse gradually until it occupied the entire space of water. Would it jump out of the water and occupy the air above it? No. Its universe would be the confines of the water, and it would not be able to exit its universe. Extending that same imagery, you can see that the form of that dye—that cloudy appearance of yellow permeating that water—is suspended in a medium. Without that medium, the dye would not manifest in that same way. That die owes its form to the medium that holds it. In the same way, the mind, like that yellow pigment, is predicated on a medium. When you need to access the mind’s higher level functions, you can’t do it in the same way you involve conscious functions. You have to do it by accessing the silent part of your mind—the medium in which the mind floats. The challenge most people have is to focus on that silence. Because the mind is active and its job is to throw up thoughts and concerns, you find that it is constantly making some sort of observation or alerting you to some possible thought. You have to extract yourself from paying attention to it when you need to, and then the mind will start to tune down. Think of your total mind as an echo chamber except in this case it’s perpetual, and you can stop it until you curtail at least one side of the equation. Without going into the workings of the mind too deeply, imagine blasting an echo chamber with a sound. What would happen? The chamber will bounce the sound back at you. What if you put another echo chamber across from it? The sound would echo again. It does this a couple of times and then dies down as the energy in the sound wave diminishes much like the ripple in a bucket that bounces back and forth until the energy of the ripple diminishes. Then it goes back to being calm again. That only works when the original echo chamber is passive. In the case of your mind, it is not passive. Your mind works on the principles of association. If you say one word, it will automatically (and almost magically) respond with another word, and that word will trigger another word, and that will trigger another. So, if you were to play the word association game, you will see that the mind is an endless source of seemingly random thoughts or fragments of thoughts. It is anything but random. The Mind and Intangibility The world is composed of two phenomena. The first is tangible—having, for example, shape, size, and mass. A shoe is an object, just like an apple or a car. These are tangible factors. The second phenomenon is intangible. For instance, whether the car is moving or stationary are intangible qualities. A good way to think about it is to wonder if you can take a picture of it. If you can, it’s tangible. If you have to resort to a video recording of it to show the changes it makes, then that is very likely intangible. In this case, movement and acceleration are all intangible properties. A larva’s metamorphosis into a butterfly is intangible, but the butterfly and the larva are both tangible. With respect to these kinds of tangible and intangible properties, it is the mind that can decipher them, which has to be done through contemplation. The brain creates memories of the result and stores it as part of the neural record. The mind is the only tool in a person’s arsenal that can convert intangible phenomena into tangible representations in the form of neurons. The mind has a stage that is built within it, and on that stage, it places representations of the various experiences and objects it comes in contact with. Without that representation in the mind, the objects that appear in the physical reality will seem unreal to us. On the other hand, if we have something in our mind but it is missing in the real world, we tend to overlook it at times or feel uncomfortable. Take, for instance, your home. You are completely familiar with it, and your mind has every detail of the physical space replicated and represented on this stage that it built in the mind. When you enter this place, the mind is totally at ease with the surroundings because it’s exactly as it should be. The observation the mind receives and the neurological imprint the brain has in store are identical. In fact, if the mind is not aware of an alteration in the physical world, it may even neglect to look at its surroundings carefully and might miss something that may have been moved. Alternatively, think about the first time you went to a certain place. Do you recall the feeling you had in that strange place? It’s a heightened state that will have you alert and observant. The more and more you visit that location after that, the more relaxed you start to feel, and you are no longer as alert or as observant as before. In fact, you may even take things for granted after some time. You could even close your eyes and know exactly where everything is because of that neurological imprint of your environment. The mind is not looking at your physical surroundings and making decisions directly. It is making decisions on that virtual stage built in your mind. That works for both tangible and intangible phenomena. Here is one way you can visualize that. If you’ve played tennis, you would realize that the ball is too fast for the eye to catch and respond. In fact, your mind only anticipates its location based on what it sees your opponent doing and the kind of court you are playing on. It calculates from there and allows you to react. If it gets it right, then it reaffirms the calculation it uses. If it gets it wrong, then it updates the calculations. That’s why the more you practice, the better you become. How does meditation come into this? It comes back to your physical mind. Remember that your memories are made of neurons, and each neuron is connected to other neurons by axons. Each neuron can have numerous connections—dozens, hundreds, or thousands. When you play the word association game, one word will trigger another because they have this connection between their respective neurons. It turns out that these connections are not fixed. They can be altered, and the neurons can be moved around. This is called neuroplasticity, and it specifically refers to the alteration of the layout of the neurons and the ability of the brain to alter what neurons connect to, which, in turn, results in thinking patterns that can be altered. If someone has a poor mind set in that they constantly think of bad outcomes and they associate negatively, then anytime they hear a certain trigger word or phrase or are exposed to almost anything, it will fire up a range of neurons that are destructive in nature. This comes down to a simple issue of just poor associative connections, and they can be altered by reconnecting the neurons through a process called neuroplasticity. Stoics in 300 BC didn’t know anything about scientific neuroplasticity, but they did understand the power of reconditioning the mind to improve the decision making process. That, in turn, improves outcomes. That brings us back to perception, reflection, and contemplation. When you understand reflection and contemplation, you are forced to deal with issues with the same groups of neurons firing whenever you approach a certain issue—just as you may constantly be shouting the word “shoe” each time you play the word association game when someone else shouts “brown.” Somehow in your neurological set the word “brown” is related to a brown shoe, so you respond by saying “shoe” when they say “brown.” You’re not going to always pick “shoe” because on different days the choice of the responses may jump the neurons from one step to the next or down two steps or even ten steps. The universe of possible responses is fixed by what your neurons are connected to. It can be any number of responses, but those responses can only work if they are connected. If you have “cucumber” on a different set of neuron connection, the utterance of “brown” is never going to evoke your mind to respond with “cucumber.” Think of your different neuron sets as a multiverse of possible neuron bunches. It’s easier to think of them in binary terms about whether or not each bunch is connected. In reality, it comes down to how many connections exist in the brain. All bunches are connected with at least one connection. If they are not connected, the probability of getting to that memory drops to exactly zero. If you want the simple explanation, then just think of them in the multiverse. The higher the number of connections emanating from a neuron, the greater the chance that that neuron will be invoked. If you look at an MRI of a brain during its regular activity, you will see flashes of energy around areas of activity. These flashes seem random but are not. They gravitate in waves of associated neurons. When these neurons fire, they trigger the neurons they are connected to, which means that when you have an idea or are subjected to a specific event, you will always have the same associative thought that triggers in its wake. The only way to change that is through cognitive conditioning and neuroplasticity. This is where meditation applies. When you meditate, the neurons are moved around and aligned in a more efficient arrangement. What you find is that one event triggers a different set of thoughts and responses than it did before the relocation of the neuron. The more you meditate, reflect, and contemplate, these neurons arrange themselves in a better formation, and you are destined to have better cognitive outcomes. The Stoics during Zeno’s time did not come close to knowing the neuroplasticity effects of meditation. What they did know was that there were positive effects from it. It altered the way they thought, and when the altered thinking sequence yielded better outcomes, the positive reinforcement solidified the change. Chapter 10 Stoicism and Christianity he role that stoicism has had to play in the development of the Christian ethic is not one to be downplayed easily. Most do not recognize the vast overlapping between the two creeds, it presents itself readily to all those who look for it. These two systems also have great differences in what they teach as well, but above all, the two had one thing in common: they both asked how it is that we should live, and got sometimes divergent and sometimes convergent answers to this question. The birth of stoicism is unique in that it occurs within a period of great chaos throughout the Hellenistic world. This chaos was originally caused by the premature death of Alexander, among other things. During this period of distress, Greek was under attack from within as well as without, and a moral decay coupled with great corruption was chipping slowly away at her internal infrastructure. In keeping all of these detrimental external circumstances in mind, we start to see more clearly why the early Stoics urged so heavily for the betterment of the inner self as a means to finding any semblance of peace in this period of chaos. Virtue under this system was the highest good to which all others were subordinate and this virtue could only be found through knowledge. The wise were therefore the most virtuous, and vice versa, under this system of stoic virtue ethics. The more knowledge we gain through virtue, the more virtuous we become as so on and so forth. Four of the most important tenets of the Christian system are forgiveness, charity, compassion, and love. Similarly to Stoicism, this religion was born into a time period of great chaos and war. The Christian answer to these issues was security and peace, which it sought to gain through diverse means. Their main answer to the issue of chaos was nested within Jesus Christ himself, who was said to be a living embodiment of God. To the Christians, it is only those who accept Jesus Christ as their lord and savior who can be saved. The Christians added another concept to the vernacular of world religion: that of sin. Within stoicism, the closest things to “sin” would most likely be the formulation of an unsound judgment, or the tendency to suffer by trying to influence incorruptible external realities. For the Christians, lots of things constituted sin, more than can be mentioned here, but the only path to the forgiveness of sins comes by faith alone, particularly faith in Jesus. Arguably the most common shibboleth within stoicism as a whole is “logos”. This term refers to the universal force of reason which governs all of the universe’s happenings. In order to gain wisdom and virtue, the Stoics argue, one must follow this force as much as is possible. If we are to look towards one belief as the foundation of stoicism, it would have to be this one. The only Christian parallel to the force of logos would be that body of Christ himself. To Christians, Jesus is perceived as the word of God itself, so to not follow his teachings is akin to not following those of God. We could argue that both of these systems are monotheistic if we allow a rather loose definition of what it means to be monotheistic. The Stoics followed logos above all else and were divided among many great early philosophers in the way of who to follow, while the Christians followed God above all else and followed God above all things. Fear and anxiety are only to be curtailed by following the divine in either system. Whether it be logos or God, these negative emotions will not be managed by any other forces than these ones. It is only with the assurance of a power greater than ourselves that we can do away with the needless worries that we have and accept what we have been born into, still expecting greater things to come. One of the greatest things that both of these creeds offer is autonomy. Both Stoicism and Christianity offer us greater things to subordinate ourselves to, things that are above both ourselves and our peers. In connecting ourselves in personal conduct with these things, we have an opportunity to avoid the pettiness and discontent that invariably comes with following the will of the crowd and to rise above the ridiculousness of what we see in others, not allowing it to affect us in any way or another. This concept of serving something greater than ourselves is exclusively monotheistic in both of these systems though, as many of these thinkers assert that it is impossible to serve more than one God or overarching principle at a time due to the fact that worship of one usually breeds contempt for the other(s). When we serve our personas, we become slaves to outward appearances, but when we serve our Gods within, we escape the slavery of public opinion. Blinded by the lights emitting from our inner spirits, we start to notice less and less of what other people are saying and doing and live our own lives to the fullest. Both of these creeds value simplicity in their worship. This is due to the fact that the need to put on a show about one’s own personal worship is uncanny, and indicates that one is either insecure about his or her own values, or needs external validation in what he or she thinks. To these systems, it is never relevant who is there to witness the worship, all that matters is that the worship takes place and that the lessons learned from higher powers are used to the best of our advantage. The rewards of following logos or God are manifold, but they all exist outside of the realm of what other people’s perceptions happen to be. These two entities are said to reward their followers regardless of what others think or expect. The fact that so and so speaks negatively about us has no effect on what we get of following logos or God. Stoicism’s lack of angels, demons, and the trinity makes it somewhat simpler than Christianity. While the centripetal force in stoic thought revolves around the unknowable conception of logos, that of Christianity revolves around the knowable conception of Christ, an embodied bastion of God’s will. These embodiments of angels, demons, the Trinity, Christ, and the devil are all examples of the Christian proclivity to personify forces beyond ourselves, a tendency not necessarily shared by the Stoics. This ultimately may have made Christianity more appealing to laymen over the centuries, giving simple visualizations of advanced conceptions and heavily peppering them with allegory, making intellectual achievement obtainable for a larger bulk of the population. In contrast with Christianity, the stoic relationship with logos is a cold and impersonal one due to the fact that there are no living embodiments of the conceptualizations but forth. Virtue and knowledge were here administered to gain the goodwill of the universe, which seemed to many too distant and too impersonal to be worthy of following. The Christians, on the other hand, taught of a God that genuinely wanted to be a part of our lives, which meant that we were already part of a relationship with this God whether we knew it or not. In order to properly analyze which of these two systems will benefit us most in the way of better understanding our external reality, we must be honest with ourselves regarding what the universe wants from us. There is a possibility that neither of these forces within these creeds wants or need anything to do with us, and that the universe is in fact just as cold and indifferent to our existence as some empirical evidence suggests. While the Christian system may seem more comforting regarding these matters, neither of these systems are definitely true. What should also be added is the fact that the system that we agree most with speaks volumes about our characters and our worldviews, the two of which should always be analyzed when considering new belief systems. Christians tend to ask God for help. This habit lies in stark contrast to the stoic proclivity to seek help from within. These two practices in time create two radically different practitioners, one having lots of faith in God and the other gaining as much faith in logos as he or she gains in the self. Since stoicism values the self more, Stoics are typically much less susceptible to spiritual manipulation than are Christians, especially amongst younger people. When it is the word of God that we are subordinate to, whenever another speaks on this word, we are more inclined to be influenced by this person. A stoic, on the other hand, only depends on his or herself to follow the divine reason. No one else can teach a stoic how to conduct his or herself in the world, making the stoic much less vulnerable in the face of those who may or may not have the best interests of others in mind. To the Stoics, any good that we come across is only going to come from ourselves. Nothing that anyone else gives us is going to make us happy. It is only ourselves who can give us the happiness that we desire. This puts us in control of our emotional destinies, with no external people or spirits to act either way on our own emotional wellbeing. The Christians, on the other hand, rely on prayer when looking to be absolved of the suffering that they face. This gives them relief in the form of the external parties of Jesus and God, which can feel more supportive than relying merely on one’s self. Stoicism in this way is a system more befitting for an independently minded person, while Christianity takes on more of a collectivist stance, to use modern verbiage. Human nature is another subject debated on within these schools of thought. To the Stoics, we are all born endowed with the gift of reason, and this gift can only be cultivated and fostered through the practice of virtue and the acquisition of knowledge. This is a positive that we are all born into, which does not need to be necessarily changed, only bolstered and strengthened. The Christians taught instead that we are all born with inherent sin, and that we can only be purified by subordination to the will of God and worship of Jesus. Within Christian thought, our moral compass is born corrupted and needs to be refined before we can be considered rational actors. So, as we can see, the main difference between the Stoics and the Christians on the subject of inherent human nature is one of positive vs. negative, that is to say, the Stoics looked at our inherent rationality and the Christians at our inherent sinfulness. When adjusting for these two competing viewpoints, we become very much a mixed entity at birth, which may be the stance most obedient to reality. In the way of bettering ourselves, the Christians place much less emphasis on using rationality to guide our actions. Under the Christian system, our conduct is only made better by the grace of God, whether we apply rational principles or not. The Stoics counter this stance with their incessant emphasis placed on rationality. The concept of an afterlife is another topic on which these two institutions are split. To the Christians, this world was nothing more than a shadow of that one which is yet to come. Visions of the dead rising at the end of days, Christ coming back to separate the sheep from the goats, and God’s kingdom being re established here on the face of the earth all pervade scripture. This viewpoint draws Christian followers into something that is much larger than themselves, and that they play in active role in even after they die. Conversely, most of the ancient Stoics made little to no mention of the afterlife and never spoke on what would happen at the end of times. Here, the focus of stoicism shifts more toward what we are doing in the here and now rather than what will happen after we die. Stoicism and Buddhism Some historians have said that stoicism was derived from Buddhism. Buddhists even came West and taught during the Roman Empire, and the Stoics were the result. I agree that Buddhism and Stoicism have similarities. Both are directed towards achieving and maintaining a mental state that we call equanimity. The word equanimity is perhaps a better word to describe this sense of detachment that the stoics are looking for than the words indifference. The mind state that the Buddhists want to achieve is called nirvana, which is similar to a mind state in stoicism. Because both point to peace of mind, being free of worry and rumination, Buddhist and stoic ways of dealing with external things or disturbers are quite similar. The Stoics use rational thinking to determine what things are up to us and what things are not up to us, and then decide that we shouldn't worry about the things that are not in our control. The Stoics try to transcend what we call a value judgment, saying that we aren't harmed by the situation itself but by our judgments about that situation. An example: someone yells at you or insults you. What aspect of this event hurts you? The insult, or the way you process the insult? According to stoicism, it's the latter, and thus we can choose to feel offended or choose not to feel offended. In other words, we experience someone insulting us, then we judge the event and attribute a value to it. For example, an insult can be experienced as hostile, and we have the urge to punch that person in the face. Then, we make a conscious decision to do it. Instead, you can experience it not as hostile but as someone else’s expression of dissatisfaction, and choose not to let it affect you. You decide that the reaction you could have is not beneficial to you, so you let it go. Buddhists have a similar approach. The Buddha said that we have a choice to receive or reject an insult. One day, when a man angrily insulted the Buddha, he asked the man if you buy something for a person and he doesn't like it or want it, to whom does that gift belong? The man answered typically by saying "I will keep that present myself." To this Buddha said, "Right, this insult belongs to you because I don't want it, then the anger returns to you and you are the one who becomes sad, not me. All you have done is hurt yourself." So, Buddhists as well as stoics are aware that we can choose to be disturbed by something. Both Stoicism and Buddhism are geared towards acceptance and not desiring things to happen, otherwise than they will happen. Buddhists say that everything is impermanent. So, whatever will happen will cease to exist anyway. We don't have problems outside ourselves, it's just what the mind makes of it. We can't control the future, so why worry about it? Stoics have a concept called Amor Fati which is the love of fate, as we have discussed. This means that we should embrace whatever happens. This doesn't mean that we shouldn't strive for anything. We should actually strive for things that are virtuous. But we shouldn't be attached to the outcome. Attaching to the outcome will create worry, and worry is detrimental to our health. The Stoics and Buddhists agree that the best thing we can do is to live in the present moment. When we live in the present moment, we don't ruminate about the past and don't worry about the future. The present moment is all we have. Furthermore, it's the place where the future is made. So, the first similarity in both of these philosophies has to do with the goal. Both in stoicism and in early Buddhism there's a sense that we want to bring ourselves to a state of equanimity under all circumstances. We find that in both traditions. Now of course, in Buddhism there is more to the goal than that, particularly in traditional Buddhism. The second similarity has to do with the method of reaching equanimity. We get ourselves to this position of equanimity through a long process of eliminating harmful greed, desire, hatred, anger, and ignorance. In both traditions, this is the case. Both traditions see greed as a problem, both traditions see anger hatred as a problem, and both traditions see ignorance as the deepest problem. The third similarity has to do with their orientation of the philosophy in that it is practice oriented. It's not just about book learning. In some kinds of philosophies, the whole point of the philosophy is to know certain facts. This is not the case in either stoicism or Buddhism. The point is more about practice than it is about knowledge. Of course, knowledge is critical and crucial. In Buddhism you have right view, and in stoicism you have all kinds of knowledge about the world. But in both cases, what is really important is to use the philosophies as the practice. The fourth similarity is their ethical focus. Both of them see the real point of the philosophy as one of ethics and of finding the best sort of life to live. This was what ethics meant in ancient Greece as well in ancient India. The point is to act in ways that are kind to other people and kind to yourself. That is going to get you the best sort of life. In a broad understanding of what that might mean, this has to do with what we can actually change. We can't change a lot of things, but we can certainly change our own ethical approach to behavior, to speech, and so on. The fifth similarity between ancient Buddhism and stoicism is that they're both pragmatic philosophies. Both of them are philosophical. Some people were involved with creating these systems and elaborating on them. In essence, philosophers were interested in the theoretical aspects, but in neither case was it supposed to be philosophy. This was not simply an idle kind of way of thinking. Instead, it was supposed to be a practical philosophy. A pragmatic philosophy. We did things because they worked. The philosophical system was arrived at because the people arriving at that philosophy believed that it was the most skillful way of approaching reality. Chapter 11 Stoicism and Buddhism ome historians have said that stoicism was derived from Buddhism. Buddhists even came West and taught during the Roman Empire, and the Stoics were the result. I agree that Buddhism and Stoicism have similarities. Both are directed towards achieving and maintaining a mental state that we call equanimity. The word equanimity is perhaps a better word to describe this sense of detachment that the stoics are looking for than the words indifference. The mind state that the Buddhists want to achieve is called nirvana, which is similar to a mind state in stoicism. Because both point to peace of mind, being free of worry and rumination, Buddhist and stoic ways of dealing with external things or disturbers are quite similar. The Stoics use rational thinking to determine what things are up to us and what things are not up to us, and then decide that we shouldn't worry about the things that are not in our control. The Stoics try to transcend what we call a value judgment, saying that we aren't harmed by the situation itself but by our judgments about that situation. An example: someone yells at you or insults you. What aspect of this event hurts you? The insult, or the way you process the insult? According to stoicism, it's the latter, and thus we can choose to feel offended or choose not to feel offended. In other words, we experience someone insulting us, then we judge the event and attribute a value to it. For example, an insult can be experienced as hostile, and we have the urge to punch that person in the face. Then, we make a conscious decision to do it. Instead, you can experience it not as hostile but as someone else’s expression of dissatisfaction, and choose not to let it affect you. You decide that the reaction you could have is not beneficial to you, so you let it go. Buddhists have a similar approach. The Buddha said that we have a choice to receive or reject an insult. One day, when a man angrily insulted the Buddha, he asked the man if you buy something for a person and he doesn't like it or want it, to whom does that gift belong? The man answered typically by saying "I will keep that present myself." To this Buddha said, "Right, this insult belongs to you because I don't want it, then the anger returns to you and you are the one who becomes sad, not me. All you have done is hurt yourself." So, Buddhists as well as stoics are aware that we can choose to be disturbed by something. Both Stoicism and Buddhism are geared towards acceptance and not desiring things to happen, otherwise than they will happen. Buddhists say that everything is impermanent. So, whatever will happen will cease to exist anyway. We don't have problems outside ourselves, it's just what the mind makes of it. We can't control the future, so why worry about it? Stoics have a concept called Amor Fati which is the love of fate, as we have discussed. This means that we should embrace whatever happens. This doesn't mean that we shouldn't strive for anything. We should actually strive for things that are virtuous. But we shouldn't be attached to the outcome. Attaching to the outcome will create worry, and worry is detrimental to our health. The Stoics and Buddhists agree that the best thing we can do is to live in the present moment. When we live in the present moment, we don't ruminate about the past and don't worry about the future. The present moment is all we have. Furthermore, it's the place where the future is made. So, the first similarity in both of these philosophies has to do with the goal. Both in stoicism and in early Buddhism there's a sense that we want to bring ourselves to a state of equanimity under all circumstances. We find that in both traditions. Now of course, in Buddhism there is more to the goal than that, particularly in traditional Buddhism. The second similarity has to do with the method of reaching equanimity. We get ourselves to this position of equanimity through a long process of eliminating harmful greed, desire, hatred, anger, and ignorance. In both traditions, this is the case. Both traditions see greed as a problem, both traditions see anger hatred as a problem, and both traditions see ignorance as the deepest problem. The third similarity has to do with their orientation of the philosophy in that it is practice oriented. It's not just about book learning. In some kinds of philosophies, the whole point of the philosophy is to know certain facts. This is not the case in either stoicism or Buddhism. The point is more about practice than it is about knowledge. Of course, knowledge is critical and crucial. In Buddhism you have right view, and in stoicism you have all kinds of knowledge about the world. But in both cases, what is really important is to use the philosophies as the practice. The fourth similarity is their ethical focus. Both of them see the real point of the philosophy as one of ethics and of finding the best sort of life to live. This was what ethics meant in ancient Greece as well in ancient India. The point is to act in ways that are kind to other people and kind to yourself. That is going to get you the best sort of life. In a broad understanding of what that might mean, this has to do with what we can actually change. We can't change a lot of things, but we can certainly change our own ethical approach to behavior, to speech, and so on. The fifth similarity between ancient Buddhism and stoicism is that they're both pragmatic philosophies. Both of them are philosophical. Some people were involved with creating these systems and elaborating on them. In essence, philosophers were interested in the theoretical aspects, but in neither case was it supposed to be philosophy. This was not simply an idle kind of way of thinking. Instead, it was supposed to be a practical philosophy. A pragmatic philosophy. We did things because they worked. The philosophical system was arrived at because the people arriving at that philosophy believed that it was the most skillful way of approaching reality. Conclusion an we bring the principles of Stoicism into our everyday modern life? Can our 21st century issues and problems truly be addressed by some philosophers who lived so very long ago? Yes, we can. And they can be a huge help in dealing with our modern lifestyle. Stoicism offers concrete solutions to human problems. Not only for the problems of ancient life nor the problems of modern society, rather it addresses the problems of humanity. There are constants that exist throughout the human race, and I speak not of the big ones we all know about, like love and hate and peace and war — a lot of these constants are the incredibly stressful things familiar to each of us. These stressors are problems that continue to trouble generation after generation. Big questions that we never seem to answer satisfactorily. And big issues that trouble our thoughts, and sometimes even our sleep. What are some of these stressors? They are the questions that surround issues such as our relations with our friends and family, the importance of material goods and possessions, the issues surrounding our career and ambitions, and most of all questions surrounding success and ethics. All of these questions would be just as familiar to an Ancient Greek standing on Zeno’s stoa, as they would be to a mid level executive sitting on the commuter train and heading home after a full day of work. Stoicism is not an emotionless philosophy, despite common misconceptions. And love of friends and family is very important to all the ancient Stoic writers. Like today, ancient Stoics asked themselves how to love each other. How to value companions and how to tell true friend from false? They wanted to know how to focus on their own inner life and still be there for their loved ones and children. They also wanted to know how to maintain a calm and tranquil home and family life and believed — as every self help magazine will tell us today — that this type of parenting must begin within oneself. Their children dealt with so many stresses too: disease, war, famine and the uncertainties of the ancient world and Stoics also sought to help their loved ones manage them. Our own children are facing so many negative inputs, from violent video games, and movies to violence in our schools — we as parents struggle to find a way to reach them and teach them about the intangibles that Stoicism upholds — reason, ethics, self control. HOW TO ANALYZE PEOPLE WITH PSYCHOLOGY AND BRAINWASHING: LEARN SPEED READING PEOPLE USING BODY LANGUAGE AND BEHAVIORAL PSYCHOLOGY. MASTER THOUGHT CONTROL AND DETECT COVERT EMOTIONAL MANIPULATION Byrch Mind and Benedict Covert PART I How to Analyze People with Psychology Introduction their words, actions, and body language. Verbal communication is likely to mislead where an individual indicates that he or she is fine when truly the person is feeling upset. The other critical role in analyzing a person is to attain effective parenting. Parents will attest that in most cases, what the child says, and what he or she is feeling may sharply contradict. Any person handling children will conclude that it is important to analyze the kids lest the person sits with a sick child, a depressed child, or a disturbed child thinking that the child is fine. In relationships, analyzing people is important to score their honesty about themselves and another entity. ! lhe primary role of analyzing people is to establish the truth status of In detail, we analyze people to gauge the level of respect they have for themselves and others. In most cases, we need to determine how much a person respects himself or herself as well as others. Relying on verbal communication cues alone will not reveal much about levels of self respect one has, including the respect that the person has for other people. Fortunately, analyzing the body language will reveal convincingly the levels of self respect and respect for others that an individual has. For instance, your dressing and personal grooming may indicate how much you value oneself. On the other hand, your facial expressions and posture will reveal much about how you regard other people, especially during a conversation. Through the analysis of a person, we can predict their spending habits. Another major reason for studying people is to predict their spending manners. For instance, when looking for a partner, it is necessary to profile their likely spending patterns. Through analysis of their body language when luxury items and services are, mentioned, one can predict how the person is likely to spend his or her cash. Additionally, the analysis of body language can indicate any signs of addictions that the person has. For instance, through an analysis of body language, we can get mild hints of substance abuse, alcoholism, shopping addiction, or signs of obsessive compulsive disorder. From this analysis of body language, one can predict the spending habits of a fiancée, kin, or employee with remarkable accuracy. Additionally, the analysis of people helps understand their patience levels. Being patient is a desirable trait, and like most desirable traits, we are likely to force it to manifest to enhance our success chances. For instance, when looking for a date, the target person is expected to push the attributes of being patient when he or she is not. It is only through reading body language that we can make an early prediction of the levels of patience that the person has. The primary role of learning body language is because people tend to rehearse vocal communication, but it is a daunting task to uniformly rehearse tone of voice, the pitch of voice, gestures, postures, and eye contact to ensure consistency. Learning about the patience levels of an individual can help people around the target person relate better with him or her. Again, the analysis of a person can reveal their hobby or how they spend their leisure time. In all social interactions, including workplace interactions, it is vital to determine the leisure preferences of the target person. A manager or supervisor in an organization will be interested in learning the actual leisure preferences of an employee with the understanding that during interviews people belt out answers that will enhance chances of being absorbed by the employer. Through analysis of the body language and incorporating verbal communication, it is possible to determine the leisure preferences of a candidate employee. In relationships, one needs to understand the partner wholesale, including their leisure preferences, to help create a middle ground with your individual leisure preferences. Furthermore, a study of people can indicate their health status. As we will learn, our physiological condition influences the kind of emotions we express and how we express, including our physical behaviors. For instance, if feeling intense pain, then one is likely to frown, sigh, and sit in a non upright position in an attempt to cope or mask the pain. Similarly, if one is feeling dizzy, then he or she is likely to appear sleepy, disconnected, and frail. In healthcare settings, the body language constitutes part of diagnosis where the eye stare and movements of limbs are taken into consideration among other aspects of physical examination. Against this backdrop, analyzing a person can help reveal the underlying health status. Equally important is that the assessment of people can help one determine their confidence levels. The level of confidence one has is important in determining how much the person will feel comfortable. In a team setting, the team leader will need to read the confidence levels of each member to determine how to delegate duties with each person feeling comfortable. If the confidence levels of an individual are low, then the individual is likely to be highly sensitive even to the mildest form of humor. In such a case, it will help to take into consideration the sensitivity of the target person when communicating informally. In personal relationships, it will help to help boost the confidence levels of the target individual while being sensitive when communicating and acting. Another role of analyzing people is to determine their levels of composure. Even though it is akin to patience, but composure is the quality to remain restraint and calm even when a provoking message is being passed. It is one of the most desired quality but hard to manifest in individuals. Being composed does not imply that one mask or hides his/her true feelings, but rather, it is the quality of carefully processing negative emotions without letting emotions overwhelm you. When you comprehend the levels of composure of the target person, then you are likely to understand when to pause the communication or ease tension rather than guiding the target person to an explosion of emotions. Finally, the analysis of people can improve their social experience. Overall, we are likely to analyze people to help us improve our social experience. We are likely to analyze potential friends to help us admit to only those people that best align with our wishes. Without analyzing people, we are likely to admit just any person as a friend and lose them shortly after that may make you think that you are the problem or that you are difficult. Additionally, studying people will help determine their true life status and help you become more sensitive and understanding about their feelings, even their verbal communication speaks the contrary. At the household level, reading the body language of your partner will help you become more understanding and responsive to their needs. Chapter 1. How Can Anyone Read People? ind reading is essentially knowing what other people truly mean, without them saying it out loud, or even despite them stating otherwise. Anyone has the potential ability to analyze others, with the right set of skills and training. It is, however, time consuming and requires focus and patience. An open minded approach cannot be overstated. The reader needs to be completely receptive to the subject’s thoughts and nuances, far removed from any prejudices that they may have about the matter at hand or the environment in which the reading is taking place. Particular attention should be paid to the subject’s eyes, as they are said to be the window to the soul. A person’s general person should be noted too, which includes but is not limited to appearance, overall behavior, physical movements, and, not surprisingly, the gut feeling you have about them. Listening to your intuition can be valuable with such matters. Context There are many reasons to want to read someone’s mind. Empathy is the most common reason because we long for a close connection with other people. Humans are social beings and this need is nature. Most of the basic emotions, sadness, joy, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust are expressed in the same way across all cultures and races. This makes it easy to read said emotions in another person. The subtle nuances are what is much harder to decipher, and it takes a dedicated person to learn how to interpret each person correctly. We all seek ease when it comes to communication with others. Reading someone’s mind can help adjust how we react to any given situation. Relating also makes it possible to respond in a suitable manner. This skill may also aid in lie detection. Being able to look past words to ascertain the truth is a valuable ability. This is most useful in criminology and law enforcement professions, where it is essential to know when and what information a perpetrator may be withholding. For example, a suspect who has an accomplice may not want to give them up. A terrorist with a bomb hidden somewhere may not want to reveal the location of the incendiary device. It is, therefore, necessary to have such analytical skills, which to decipher the information that may not necessarily be spoken. Speed and accuracy are imperative in these instances. The situation or the environment in which a nonverbal cue applies matters. The same thing done in a different setting or as a reaction to various circumstances could mean other things. For example, a cough in a draughty room could be just that, an innocent cough, whereas a cough after an especially awkward comment could be a sign of discomfort. One should always be careful not to pay mind to stereotypes as a mind reader. People and their body language are as diverse as the fish in the sea. One people ‘tell’ may not necessarily be another’s. This is well evidenced by high stakes poker players who take time and resources to research their opponents and figure out what their weakness is, to gain a competitive edge. Considering More Than One Sign Communication is done through multiple distinct channels; there is verbal, non verbal, written, and visual. These are all used differently, according to the message one wants to put across. For example, someone who is angry at someone else may text or write to them in capital letters to express their anger, which would be equated to shouting if the person re actually speaking their thoughts. It is essential to understand the subject’s thought process and how it applies to all these. More often than not, it takes a combination of signs to bring the intended message out clearly. A mind reader needs to learn by constant practice how to correctly interpret a combination of signs in the subject. For example, eyes downcast could mean that someone is ashamed. The same motion while continually looking outside or away from you may mean that they have something to hide, or that they are not interested in the current topic of discussion. Signs are also vital because, for someone who may be living with one kind of challenge or other, they may need more than one way to understand a statement or concept. Likewise, they will also communicate with more than one sense. Examples include people with failing vision, the hearing impaired, and even people within the autism spectrum, especially those who may not necessarily understand typical social cues and need help interpreting them. Not Knowing the Person Reading a person unknown to you can pose a challenge, but it is still possible. Meeting someone for the first time is a whole new experience that registers as a ‘new file’ in the brain and sets the tone for consecutive meetings. Hence the adage “first impressions are very important.” Reading a stranger’s mind may require more patience and more intense focus, so as not to miss out on subtle cues. One should be careful not to make the subject uncomfortable, though, and it is recommended not to stare for too long. An initial fifteen seconds should be enough to get a general understanding of someone without making them uneasy. A short series of basic questions, like name and address, should elicit truthful answers. These inquires can help establish a baseline for that person’s facial expressions, tone of voice, and eye contact when they are telling the truth. Another generally accepted ‘tell’ is the firmness of one’s handshake. A firm handshake may denote confidence, while a weak handshake may denote a non committal attitude. One should also consider other factors that could determine a person’s responses. These include age and cultural background. For example, someone born in the forties or fifties may be more conservative on subjects to do with sexuality or religion than a millennial might be. Also, in some cultures, handshakes are not appropriate, especially between individuals of different genders. Being unaware of such a seemingly trivial matter could lead one to misread a subject who does not want a handshake or who gives only a fleeting one. When reading a stranger, it is best not to make assumptions. Such haste can lead to misunderstandings. Take the time to learn the basics of an individual. A current mood may not be that person’s usual disposition. For example, maybe they had a hard time finding parking and seem flustered, which is just a momentary state. Their real character should be evident once the agitation is over. Biases We should also be particularly careful about applying our own judgments and perceptions to the person whose mind is being read. These are referred to as cognitive biases. On the contrary, we should consciously strive to observe or listen to the other individual objectively and rationally. Understanding these biases helps us to avoid the pitfalls of misunderstanding or wrongly interpreting the other person’s responses or intended meaning. Being objective toward others is also a wise way to conduct oneself, in general. These preconceived notions are the halo effect, the confirmation bias, the actor observer bias, the false consensus effect, and the anchoring bias. The Halo Effect The Halo Effect is also referred to as ‘the physical attractiveness stereotype.’ It is the tendency to let our initial impression of a person influence what we think of them overall. It has the potential to cloud our vision on the person’s other characteristics just because we judged them at first sight. The more physically appealing one is to us, the more favorably we are disposed to them, and vice versa, without taking into consideration the person’s other character traits. For example, a well dressed person on the street would gain more of our attention and possibly admiration than a is shabbily dressed person, yet the well dressed person may be a ruthless grifter who preys on retirees while the shabbily dressed one could be an honest person down on his luck. This is also very much evidenced at job interviews, where one is encouraged to attend well groomed to give a positive first impression. We associate attractiveness with benevolence. The Confirmation Bias The confirmation bias is when people lean towards information that seems to confirm previously held beliefs. It is a polarizing pitfall. People may listen to the same story but only pick from it what confirms their opinions, to the exclusion of all others. For example, a presidential campaign usually has supporters and opponents, and whatever a candidate says or does is sure to be interpreted to suit either side. It will be praised and touted by supporters, while the same action will be vilified and discredited by opponents. We should be careful not to let our own long standing ideals determine what we hear and understand from the person whose mind we are reading. Instead, we should listen logically and rationally to reach an informed conclusion. The Actor Observer Bias The Actor Observer Bias is when we perceive others and attribute their actions to several variables, influenced by whether we are the actor or the observer in a situation. That is, when it comes to our actions, we are more likely to explain ourselves by attributing faults to external influences while blaming other people’s actions to their internal causes. For example, imagine being late to a meeting and saying the traffic was unbearable yet blaming another person who comes in a few minutes passed by saying that they are just lazy. This kind of bias should be far from a mind reader’s modus operandi. Otherwise, the exercise would only be clouded with endless blame games. The False Consensus Effect The False Consensus Effect refers to our tendency to overestimate how much other people agree with our own beliefs, behaviors, attitudes, and values. It stems from the fact that we spend most of our time with the same people, who tend to share our opinions. This leads us to believe that our thoughts are the same as the majority, even outside of our circle. Those who think like us are good and normal, while everything else is not. This is a dangerous attitude for anyone because it can easily foster intolerance. Thinking this way limits our understanding of the subject’s opinion if it differs from our own. For example, a spirited defense of the benefits of eating meat or animal protein may be unacceptable or repulsive to a vegan, who would thereby miss the subtle nuances of how the other is expresses sincerity and conviction. We must remember that the world is full of people from different backgrounds. The Anchoring Bias This bias occurs when we allow ourselves to be overly influenced by the first piece of information that we hear regarding any subject. This is a tricky cognitive device because has a significant bearing on how a conversation or negotiation will proceed. For example, imagine hearing that “there is ebola in Africa.” This is a blanket statement, as Africa is a continent, not a single country, and the disease may be confined to only one country or one region, and the rest of the continent is ebola free. An over cautious European government may issue a travel advisory to Africa, thereby affecting many other countries who are reliant on tourism, Ebola free though, they may be. It also affects serious matters like medicine. A doctor can create an anchoring point, where his first impression on the symptoms a patient may present could lead to them giving a wrong diagnosis. This is the reason for the recommendation of a second or even third opinion, giving the new doctor a complete history of the problem, despite it all being in your medical file. Anyone trying to get to the bottom of a problem should be keen to take in all the information presented, and not be tempted to overlook important data based on the initial utterance. One who can do that will have overcome the anchoring bias. Mirroring Body Language This is a nonverbal and intuitive tool used to form a bond and establish a rapport between two or more persons. It helps to build a connection of mutual trust and understanding. Mirroring applies to all aspects of body language, including posture, gestures, accents, voices, and intonation. The most common forms are smiling and yawning. Smiling when you see someone else smile immediately improves your mood. It is also very common to yawn within thirty seconds of seeing or hearing someone yawn. Even a fake yawn can elicit a real yawn in someone else! To be perceived as being on the same wavelength or vibe as the person whose mind you are reading, it is advisable to mirror their body language. Be careful to copy only the positive gestures. For example, speak at the same tone and pace that they do. Talking too fast may make them feel intimidated or under pressure while going too slow may make you seem disinterested. Similarly, sitting upright is a positive body expression. You should not slouch, even if your subject is slouching. It could come off as lazy or unprofessional. It is also not advised to presume someone’s feelings and use that to inform your behavior, as this can lead to miscommunication. It is a documented fact that assuming a specific body language position that is identifiable with a particular emotional state makes you start to experience the said feeling. For example, steepling your fingers, which is connecting the fingertips of both hands and pressing them together, is a sign of authority and confidence. Doing this during meetings makes you feel more confident about the message you are putting across. Men and women have also been shown in studies to have different ways of mirroring body language, generally. A person interested in reading minds should be aware of this in order to apply it successfully. Women tend to be more astute at picking up and interpreting psychical signals. They are able to flow more easily with a conversation through multiple changes in voice, gestures, and facial expressions. Men, however, prefer to keep a mask like appearance, which makes them harder to read. They do experience the same range of emotions but prefer not to show it on their face or with too much movement. This allows them to feel in control. Therefore, the more effective way to mirror a man is by matching his body language as opposed to trying to imitate his facial expressions. Another important factor to consider when mirroring body language is your relationship with the person you are following. A subordinate mimicking the boss’s dominant body language may be interpreted as arrogance. Matching the movements of someone who is trying to intimidate you, may disarm them and make them more agreeable. All in all, mirroring makes the other person see their own reflection in you, making them instantly comfortable and more receptive and trusting. Chapter 2. Our Bodies and the Way They Talk Positive Bodily Gestures Ow we carry ourselves is important not only during usual conversations but also during interviews, formal discussions, panel meetings, group discussions, etc. It is hard for one to survive in a professional arena without positive body language. Our posture can convey the right information to the recipient or others. Allowing yourself to seem open and willing to learn has an impact on the way others view you. Imagine that you have just completed a job interview, feeling as though you aced every question. When the company picks another candidate, you are left wondering what you did wrong. The answer could be in your posture or gestures. Mastering your message will give you the power to control the way that others perceive you. Below are movements that are generally understood to indicate positive body language: Relaxed or Uncrossed Limbs Relaxed limbs rarely cross one another, except as a position of comfort. They hang loosely. Arms Tense arms are held close to the body and are rigid, but relaxed arms move smoothly or hang loosely. Crossing can indicate tension while folded may just be comfortable. Hands During the conversation, and we are anxious, most of the time we use our hands to hold ourselves or fidget to show tension. Allow yourself to find a natural stillness. Jerky movements are distracting and show your fear. Gestures are not tense nor sudden but are generally open. Legs — Legs may casually be flung out or sit gently on the floor when sitting. They may move to a rhythm while you tap your toes. They may also be crossed, but not wound around each other. When a person is controlling the upper part of the body and arms, legs can convey tension. On top of the table, one may appear relaxed, but the legs may be wrapped and held tense. It can be helpful to consciously relax your extremities before a professional meeting. Open Palms Palm gestures are commonly used in conversations, but do people really understand what they are doing or why? There are three positions one can form: closed fist, palms down, and palms up. Each of these gestures can relay a different attitude. Therefore, it is important to master and use them appropriately. e Palms Down: Palms down shows dominance, it is used to establish authority and superior attitude. It is a way to tell people you are in control, and you are doing the talking. Intensity depends on how forceful the motion is or how inclined your hand is. This can also be a good device to prevent other people from interrupting your speech. You simply raise your hand when someone is about to interrupt, and you ask them to wait, non verbally. Another example is when you raise the hand with your palms towards someone; by doing this, you are asking for patience. This can also mean you are creating a wall between you and the other person. e Palms Up: When someone places their palms up, they tell us that they are honest, trustworthy, and have nothing to hide. Our subconscious has accepted this as a credible way to show sincerity. This explains why people who hide their hands during conversation appear a little suspicious. This can also signal submissiveness. This is a way to gain trust and support by giving up control. For instance, with your palms up, you ask someone to do something, there is a high chance he or she will accept the request, not as an order but as a favor. e Pointing: This gesture can be annoying or useful. When we were growing up, we used it to point at stuff and to learn to count or name objects. As grownups, we also use it as a tool in teaching. However, pointing at people, especially with the thumb, is rude. It is considered as a sign to ridicule or a way to accuse someone. It is best to avoid this gesture unless your goal is a provocation. The Speed of the Speech The speed of your speech is a significant factor in how your audience will perceive the meaning, intent, credibility, impact, and emotional state of your words. If you want to capture the attention of others, you need to find a proper speaking pace to pass along the information. Effective speaking takes these factors into consideration In some situations, you may have to slow down your speech. For example, regional or ethnic accents can create barriers during communication. If you have a strong inflection, people from different areas or countries may struggle to understand what you are saying. Therefore, it is important to slow the haste in your voice to allow them time to process your words. If you are a fast talker, you could be losing your audience. A good pace of speech ranges between 140 160 words per minute. Any rate higher than that can make it difficult for the audience to absorb the material. There may be countries or regions that speak at a faster speed but going slower is preferable. However, speech speed, which is too low, can give a listener an impression that is incompetent, slow in thinking and being uneducated. Although, if you are a foreigner, measured speaking is important since it may be a challenge for the listener when it comes to your pronunciations. There is a comfortable medium that suits most situations. Pupil Size During our conversations, we mostly look at the other person’s face. The signal people send out with their eyes can reveal a lot about their attitudes and emotions. The Pupils react unconsciously to stimuli and, therefore, cannot be manipulated or controlled. Your eyes are the means of seeing what is going inside of you. This is why when people meet for the first time, they make judgments based on what they see. When an individual holds a gaze, he or she is telling you one of these two things. First, they find you interesting or attractive or they are feeling hostility or anger. You can ascertain this by looking at their pupils. In the former case, the pupils are dilated, while in the later have constricted pupils. Pupils will dilate or contract as mood and attitude change from negative to positive and vice versa. When one gets excited, their pupils will get dilated to up to four times the normal size. Conversely, negative moods or anger causes the pupils to contract. There is an easy way to remember this information: when the person wishes to take in more of the world (because they are pleased) the pupils expand. They shrink when the person wants to limit the flow of information. Another example is the eyebrow lift, which is a long distance equivalent of “hello” When they rise briefly, the purpose is to draw attention. Leaning Forward To establish trust and allow others to open up to us, we need to show them that we don’t fear them and that we are not a threat. You do this by showing the willingness to cooperate. Leaning forward is a sign that you are engaged and attentive to the conversation. When people are involved in an interaction, they lean in to signal that they are listening to the information. This is a universal sign that the other party is consciously respecting your words. Use this device when listening to others, to encourage their trust in you. Negative Bodily Gesture If you have studied body language, I am sure you have come across this term before. Negative gestures are body movements that could give a bad impression to others. Even when an individual does not know how to gestures, he or she can still manage to get an inaccurate perception of your movements, because the subconscious will detect them. Here are some of the postures that are related to negative body language gestures: e Leaning Away: Also, can be referred to as leaning out, which signals people that you are not interested in them, what they have to say, or/and their ideas. This movement is important in dating, business, and friends. For example, propping yourself toward conversation when you are on an outing with your partner can show her or him that you wish to gain some intimacy, whereas doing the opposite suggests that you are not paying attention. During a business meeting, when you sit at the edge of your seat and lean in towards a person presenting, this shows that you are keen to gain the information. While with your friends having lunch, when you sit leaning forward as you engage, you portray interest. These gestures all work in reverse to show the opposite. This action is still valid, even when standing. Leaning away can portray that you are closed off to the interaction. Do this when it is your goal to communicate disinterest. Leaning back can also be used as a display of dominance. You can observe a pair of partners, to understand who is in control. Pointing your body toward the conversation can be a signal of submissiveness. e Crossed Limbs: People always either knowingly or unknowingly, read our body language. Crossed limbs have a significant role to play in non verbal communication. Crossed Arms: Crossed arms can be read by others to mean you are insecure, distant, defensive, anxious, or stubborn. Crossed Legs: It shows dominance and confidence when you sit with your legs crossed, ankle over the knee. This is predominantly male body movement, but it is being used increasingly by women. Ankle lock is crossing your legs at the ankle while seated. This can mean that you are uncertain, holding back, or fearful. e Tight Shoulders: Tension can be telling for a person’s state of mind. Anxiety and distaste can cause a constriction of the muscles around the neck. Stiffness is a sign that someone is apprehensive. Shoulders hunched up, usually with arms folded or crossed tight and holding the body, this can be a sign that the person is feeling cold. This can be a sign that the person is extremely uncomfortable. When an individual fears attack (actual or virtual), he or she raises shoulders and lowers the head to protect the neck. Our instincts dictate some of our movements without our knowledge. e Feet Turned Away: People rarely notice the secret messages their feet are sending to others. They have the ability to reflect our feelings. If a window to your soul exists in the eyes, then legs must be the signpost to what you are thinking or feeling. People do not pay much attention to how they position their legs when having a conversation. Therefore, if you are building up your body language, then perhaps it is best you add this positioning to your cluster of cues. Control the message that you share with others while also accurately reading anyone around you. Torso The torso is the trunk of the whole body. It contains all the major organs. The word is derived from the Latin “thyrsus”, which means stalk. This area is also flexible. It can turn, twist, bend forward and backward. This is an area of the body that people have limited control over. Perhaps, that is why we have vital organs there. In simple words, it works without our conscious involvement. Lack of our conscious control makes this a good indicator of our body language signals. When one turns their torso away, it could be an unconscious signal that they want to leave. It could also mean they are feeling threatened and are just trying to protect the vital organs. It could be a signal the don’t like you and don’t like to engage with you any further. In a business setting, people turn their torso for different reasons: they are defensive or feeling insecure, or they are in a hurry. It could also mean they are hiding something, but no matter the reason, when it happens, it’s a sign they are no longer engaged with you and are not entirely comfortable with you. These situations call for acting with care, as not to offend the other party. You can also send signals using individual parts of the body. Here are details of some of the contributions of each of those parts: Neck Body Language The neck is used to rotate and support the head, so it controls some body language. The neck can also relay few signals of its own, including: Hiding Neck is where a predator will aim, either to rip out the windpipe, or penetrate the jugular artery. When people feel an imminent threat, they will react by protecting this sensitive region. Some people can do this by pulling down the chin to protect the throat, and others may raise their shoulders to defend the sides. This is often not a conscious behavior on behalf of the acting party. Turning — The neck can be rotated to enable us to look in many directions. This is useful to extend our range of vision. It can also be used to deliberately send a signal that an individual is removing or giving attention. The neck can also be rotated to exercise it which can signal tension or indicate boredom. Chest Body Language The chest can be used to send non verbal body language signals, including: Thrust Out This movement attracts attention and can be used to display romantic gestures. Women, for example, are aware of the fact that men are aroused when they see breasts. When they push forward their chests, they may be inviting intimacy or just teasing. Men also push their chest forward to display their strength. They do this both for attraction and aggression. In the case of a mate, the man is saying, “I am strong and can protect you,”. In relation to a peer, he is suggesting “I am strong and had better not cross me”. Withdrawn — The chest cavity contains very vital organs and is vulnerable to attack. When pulled back, it indicates the person is attempting to hide or appear inoffensive. This can either protective or a sign that someone is insecure and ill at ease. Leaning — Leaning toward another person can have two meanings. Doing this can show interest in the other person. It can also indicate a more romantic attention. Secondly, it can invade the space of the other person, thus posing as a threat. This is aggressive and often shows in dominant body language. Hips Body Language Hips are at the base of the body trunk. Without any doubt, they do signal certain messages in nonverbal communication. They aid in the movement of the torso when reacting to stimuli. Thrust Out Hips have primary sexual organs and trusting them out is a provocative and suggestive gesture. The same movement may be used to mock and taunt others. Held Back This is the opposite of thrusting them forward, it hides the genitals, to prevent them from being noticed. This can be a defensive position indicating that someone is uneasy. Moving Hips moving from side to side is a common dance move. Any movement that is in tandem with a musical rhythm can show someone to be carefree, fun or sensual. Movement also attracts attention to that part of the body and, hence inviting flirtatious actions. Moving hips back and forth, simulating sexual intercourse and can be considered arousing. Leg Body Language Our legs can tell a lot without us realizing it. This is because people normally focus on the upper body when they want to concentrate on their movements. Legs conflicting with the rest of the body show deliberate control and thus signaling what they are thinking. Open Standing — Standing with feet open about the width of your shoulders is a relaxed pose and normal. A wider stance makes one appear bigger, hence signaling dominance and power. Closed Standing — A person standing with feet put together displays some anxiety. This is related to the previously mentioned desire to take up less space. Crossed Legs — Crossed legs while standing can mean shyness, especially when hands are held behind the back the head is lowered. When sitting this movement can take many forms. For example, an ankle cross while tucking your legs under the seat can show concealed anxiety. Moving — A crossed leg and be moved up and down, and this can indicate impatience. A leg might also swing to music, meaning the person is enjoying the vibe and is relaxed. Walking — A person with a fast walk shows he or she is in a hurry while slowing down indicates that the person has time to kill. However, an unaffected walking speed indicates self consciousness; the person is concerned with how others perceive them. Our bodies display these cues depending on how we are feeling and what we are thinking. People do this either consciously or unconsciously, based upon the setting of the conversation. Looking for these signs can allow us to assess what the person is feeling, even when it contradicts their words. We can also connect with others more effectively by learning how to use our non verbal communication cues to complement our words. Chapter 3. The Basics: n today’s modern world of politics and business, many people now understand that everything has become about appearance and body language over the pure merit of a person. Because of this, the vast majority of high profile politicians now have their own personal body language consultants that help them come across as being honest, caring, and responsible individuals. Since the 1960s, the evolution of our body language has been actively studied, and the public was brought into the world of our body language through a reading titled Body Language, which was published in 1978. Despite this, the majority of individuals believe that speech is our main form of communication today. Well, speech is very important in getting across what we believe into those around us. Evolutionarily speech has only been with the human race for a very short amount of time. Prior to widespread modern language, you could understand what people meant or felt towards you through only their body language. We are still capable of this today, but it becomes a little bit more difficult because of the weight we put on spoken word. With a few simple tips and tricks, you can begin the basics of reading someone’s body language like it is a second language. The first thing that we are going to discuss is you have to understand the context. You have to be able to look at every piece of the puzzle—rather than just the corner piece and trying to understand what the picture is. Hence, while you should be listening to what a person is vocally telling you, it is also vital for you to mentally thinking about what that person's emotional condition at that moment is and then compare it to the physical environment around them. If a person is smiling and if their cheeks are bright red, while the room just so happens to be hot at that very moment, that person might not necessarily be embarrassed. They might simply feel hot. It is interesting to note the connection between a person's gender and their ability to perceive nonverbal communication. There's lots of talk in modern conversations about a “mother’s intuition.” This is not an old wives’ tale. Women have been proven in qualitative scientific studies to be more perceptive at understanding body language than men are. A study done at Harvard University showed that when a random sample of men and women were given the same film with no audio, the women were eighty seven percent more likely to guess what the circumstances of the situation were, whereas men only guessed correctly forty two percent of the time. It is believed that women's perceptiveness of body language is superior to men because, for the first few years of raising a child, a mother has to rely almost entirely on nonverbal communication to understand the child's needs and wants. This is supported by the fact that women with children guessed the situation correctly almost every single time. This is also often used to explain why women tend to be better negotiators than men. Much of basic common body language is the same all over the world despite religion and racial differences. Some examples of this are smiling when you're happy or scowling when you are sad or angry. The nodding of the head is almost completely universally used to indicate an affirmation of sorts. It is believed that this form of affirmation is a genetic predisposition because individuals who were born blind still use this form of body language even though they never learned to use it visually. This then brings me to an interesting point about body language and whether it is a learned action or genetic action. This is a debate that is ongoing and is still being researched even up to this day. Some forms of body language can be traced back to animal ancestry and are believed to be purely genetic. This is the action of sneering at another person in anger or irritation. An animal’s a similar action to this is done when preparing for an attack. There are three basic rules for an accurate reading of somebody's body language. You must keep these three rules in mind when attempting to analyze any person for their body language. Reading Clusters of Gestures Rather Than an Individual You should never try to analyze or interpret a single solitary gesture separately from all of the others. You have to look at the entire picture. This means that you have to look at every action of the person's body and compare it to the rest of them. It is easy to remember this rule when you think of body language as just that: a language. As with any vocally spoken language, body language has its own “words,” “sentences,” and “punctuation.” Attempting to understand somebody's body language through one specific gesture is like attempting to understand an entire paragraph from just a single word. You have to read each individual gesture as its own word and put them together to create sentences so that you can understand the language that someone's body is giving off. A common rule of thumb for this is the idea that someone needs at least three words to be able to create a proper sentence. As for body language, this means that you have to be able to compare at least three gestures that a person is giving off before you can begin to understand their innermost feelings and thoughts. Searching for Consistency This is especially important when trying to decide if somebody may be lying to you or not. Consistency is key in being able to tell if somebody is telling the truth. You have to consider the words that are coming out of their mouth in relation to what their body language is showing you. If an individual's words and body language are in conflict in a given moment, it is often best to ignore what is being said and focus instead on body language exclusively. Inconsistency between body language and vocal words is a strong sign of lying. Context, Context, Context Context is incredibly important when attempting to read a person's body language. You have to take into account an individual's environment, in addition to the signals that their body is giving off. There are lots of body symbols that have no meaning whatsoever when an individual is in certain situations. For instance, a person with arms and legs crossed tightly together on a cold winter's day is not necessarily a sign of feeling defensive—they are most likely just cold. Chapter 4. Verbal vs. Nonverbal Defining Nonverbal Communication onverbal communication is a very vital medium of communication that gives room for sending and receiving messages using any of the human sensory organs without the use of words or utterances. There are several forms of nonverbal communication, and they include body language, facial expressions, posture, and gestures, and so on. The purpose of these cues is to pass across information through movement of some parts of the body which have interpretations to them based on individuality complex. Nonverbal Cues Nonverbal cues are informative behaviors that are not entirely linguistic in nature as far as the content of the message is concerned. And for the visible nonverbal cues, there are head movements, facial expressions, hand and body movements, etc. all these have a direct relationship towards the interpersonal communication and the long term effect it has in bringing people together. While on the other hand, auditory nonverbal cues deal with nonlinguistic sounds as related to pitches and its variations, how loud it is, the speed it takes, and also breathiness. The study of nonverbal behavior has a linkage in some aspects of psychology, which reflects the nature of human, social impact, differences between groups and individuals. However, to understand and fully analyze people, there is a need to draw a line between nonverbal behavior and nonverbal communication because they are two distinct concepts. While nonverbal behavior includes behaviors that ensue without the awareness of the person conveying the message, nonverbal communication also deals with same as they could be used interchangeably. How to Interpret Nonverbal Cues It is, however, possible to interpret nonverbal cues, whether the right way or wrongly, and this gives room for misunderstanding. As you send a message, there may be leakage, which is the unintentional transmission of information through nonverbal channels. As noted, before, nonverbal cues have tendencies to be misinterpreted due to the ambiguous translations attached to them. So, for you to get a clue of what is being said, you’ll need other information before you get the correct interpretation. These cues are mainly to serve the function of conveying emotions, interpersonal attitudes, or any related habits to pass a message across. That is why nonverbal cues serves as a way of giving feedback to what another person said to show how comprehending the message seems. So, with these cues, you can comment, dramatize, or react to any discussion without having to say a word. However, the art of analyzing people comes with the need to understand the coordination of these behaviors. Nonverbal behaviors foster a sort of intimacy between people, thereby helping them maintain relationships in the long run or a desired level of rapport. Another important side to nonverbal behaviors is how you present yourself. How do you present yourself before someone? What was the first impression that spurred from you to the other person? How would you react if you were in the person’s shoes? These and many more questions give way for a_ better comprehension of what the appropriate relationship or communication should be. It further gives you an idea for the kind of expressions that are needed per time or knowing the expressions that best suit someone and the best time to do that. So, you’re expected to understand the emotional situation at hand and how best to react to it in social parlance. This sense of self presentation involves all these and more depending on how important you take human interactions on daily basis. Nonverbal cues, despite its ambiguous attachment of meanings, include blinking, finger movements, a smile, movement of the eyeballs in a particular direction, etc. You should, however, not be tempted to stand on what you perceive to be the meaning of each of these. When you smile, it might mean a sign of disapproval according to some cultures. The rising pitch of your voice shows that you’re under stress, but the meaning might differ to another person. When you fold your arms, it might mean another thing to the person beside you, and that’s how the chain goes on and on. So, what do I do? You just have to take note of your baseline, the initial sign or signal, and the subsequent signals. Though there are generalizations of language and exceptions in them to behold, which doesn’t change the stance of social influences of how people relate. Defining Verbal Communication Communication systems employ the signs and symbols for interaction purposes. As signs are signals used to convey a message, so also is the general philosophy of verbal communication. Getting the whole idea of verbal communication and translating them rightly is a function of the receiver knowing the cause of the action. How do I mean? You get to understand a particular signal because you understand the cause of the action. For example, if your child mutters some words and points directly at the door, what does that mean? It definitely means that probably someone is at the door or an attention is need at the door. On the other hand, symbols are marks or words indicating a complex level of reasoning and understanding between the parties involved. Symbols as complex as they seem brings about the concept of symbolic interactionism theory. Whenever verbal communication takes place, it allows us to look for and understand the symbolic content that gives us the idea of what the speaker is talking about. This process is sub divided into: SEMANTICITY: Semanticity is knowing the relationship between the after effect of an action and what caused it. As you know that signals stand for a particular meaning of its own even though might be construed to mean other complex things. For example, a little child shouting at the top of his voice with a sharp knife in his hand connotes something. So as an observer, what comes to your mind is that he cut himself with the knife and not that his noise stands out rightly for the cut itself. It allows you to see occurrences differently as much as you see it separately to understand the main message it’s passing across. GENERATIVITY: Generativity takes the stand that a finite message could take the shape of infinite meanings. The idea shows the level at which diverse thoughts range from individual to individual. And that’s why languages are capable of combining and recombining symbols and signals to produce meaningful and comprehensible utterances to users of language. DISPLACEMENT: this third pillar supports the idea of communicating what is abstract, and it has a linkage in language. This is due to the fact that language gives room for the communication of things that exists only in the mind. The imaginative tendencies through this displacement factor allow communicating participants to discuss that which only exist in the imagination aside from what can be seen. Chapter 5. Your Mind and the Way You Communicate Encoding and Decoding hen we talk about broadcasting and receiving information from others in verbal and nonverbal ways, we’re really talking about the process of encoding and decoding. When you encode information, you’re generating it. This could be a smile, a sigh, or folding your arms in front of you. When we’re observing the transmission of encoded information, we interpret that information and call it decoding. There are a number of factors that play a part in how we encode and decode information, especially social information. For example, a hand gesture in one part of the world can be positive and friendly, but that same hand gesture can be exactly the opposite in another part of the world. The Limbic System The limbic system is an easy way to refer to and describe several interconnected parts of the brain, all of which play a large part in our emotions and self preservation. Though most of these components of the brain are more or less considered to be a part of the limbic system, it depends on who you ask. Some professionals include five brain components in their interpretation of the limbic system, while others include eight or more components of the brain to make up the limbic system. It’s in the limbic system that you can find triggers for memory, motivation, addiction, and survival. It’s thought to be one of the longest developed parts of a mammalian brain, but still, we know so little about it. Senses, especially the sense of smell, is highly associated with this part of the brain. The limbic system, then, is often referred to as the “feeling and reacting” brain, and this is how we too will think of it. Let’s take a look at some of the most widely accepted components that make up the limbic system. Though these components are interconnected and work together, they are all responsible for different aspects of our responses and emotions. Hypothalamus The hypothalamus is involved in behavioral function, sexual function, endocrine function, and the nervous system. It receives input from the hippocampus by way of the fornix and the amygdala. Some functions that require direct input from environmental stimuli take place in this region of the brain, such as the regulation of body temperature, endocrine functions, appetite, and again, sex. Amygdala The amygdala makes connections with many brain regions. The amygdala is critically involved in managing behavioral responses and responses related to the endocrine and nervous systems. This is where we see responses such as revenge and rage, fear, and anxiety. Hippocampus The hippocampus is an ancient area of the brain. It helps to control corticosteroid production but is also significant in processing and understanding spatial relations within the environment. The hippocampus is also largely responsible for memory functions. It’s the hippocampus that decodes information, stores it, and retrieves it. Limbic Cortex The prefrontal cortex is crucial for judgment, insight, motivation, and mood. It’s also related to the function of reacting in a conditioned way. When an individual suffers Damage to the prefrontal area, there are difficulties with abstract thinking, judgment, moods, and critical thinking skills. The prefrontal cortex is also strongly influenced by the use of alcohol. When an individual suffers a mood disorder or dysfunction, it’s in the prefrontal cortex that abnormality is often found. All of these functions focus around instinct and emotion and therefore make up a significant part of how we respond to stimuli and how we interpret responses to stimuli. If these areas of the brain have experienced trauma or damage, then the chances are more likely that this will become clear by careful attention to the individual’s behaviors and responses. The Conscious, Subconscious, and Unconscious Mind Since you’ll be referring to the subconscious mind moving forward with the art of influence, it will help to refresh what you know about brainwave functionality. As you may be aware, human beings exhibit several brainwave functions on a daily basis. As an individual wake from sleep and begins to perform the moming regimen, the brainwave functionality continues to change. On the way to work and throughout the day, the individual passes through multiple phases of brainwave functionality. The flow from one brainwave function to the other is a natural occurrence that happens to all human beings, all the time. We normally shift from one to the other as if we’re moving through a scale. The scale moves from beta brainwaves to alpha waves, then to theta brainwaves. Beta brainwaves can be thought of in comparison to the critical mind, concentrating, ever assessing, and making decisions based upon stimuli. Alpha brainwaves are closer to that magic spot, the subconscious mind. In this state, you find yourself relaxing. This is probably your brainwave functionality as you’re watching a movie. This is generally a state of calm where the imagination is allowed to unfold. The magic spot is really in the theta brainwaves. You’ve probably been in the theta state at least once in the last 24 hours if you’ve been asleep. If you’ve ever been hypnotized, you’ve experienced the theta state. If you’ve ever found yourself lucid dreaming, you’ve been in the theta state. There is another brainwave functionality so called delta waves. If you've gone too far, you're in delta mode. That’s okay; it’s an excellent result. Delta mode is what’s happening when you experience REM sleep. As someone who wants to ignite your prospect’s imagination, you’re aiming for something between the alpha state and the beta state, but it can definitely depend on the person and the circumstance. For example, you’re definitely not going to be able to lull a sales prospect or a romantic interest into a hypnotic trance in order to influence them on the spot, so you’ll need tactics that are built for the subconscious but interact on a conscious, logical, level. The individual’s protector and decision maker are the conscious mind, the beta brainwave machine. This is the critical thinking, logical, mind that constantly surveys its surroundings and catalog data. This is the mind that is learning and concentrating and keeping us safe and comfortable from the day’s stimuli. Imagine you’re driving down the road to a place you’ve been hundreds of times. It’s almost as if your hands as if your car itself, knows the way automatically. You know the way to go so automatically that your mind begins to wander. You think about what you should have said to that person the other day, or what tasks are waiting for you at home. This is your mind in the alpha brainwave mode, but of course, the beta mind is still focused on safely driving the road it knows. Before long, you look around, and you’re halfway there, and you don’t even remember the first part of the drive. You continue leisurely along in alpha mode, winding the route you know so well you don’t even need to think about it, and in an instant a deer runs out in front of your car. Your beta mind engages immediately, responding to the sudden stimuli and reacting fast enough to slow and swerve and miss the deer; alpha thoughts left swiftly behind. The conscious analytical mind and beta brainwave function are critical for survival, but it’s not the most conducive for making effective suggestions because the analytical mind will latch onto the data to filter and sift and compare against what it knows already. The critical mind could essentially talk you out of any deliberate suggestion before it even gets planted in the subconscious mind where it can begin to take hold. You might tell yourself consciously that you’re going to finally close this big client by the end of the month, but your critical mind will be quick to point out: e The client is probably considering other options e You haven’t closed a deal this big ever e You haven’t closed them yet e The client has a tendency to drag their feet e Even the top salesperson at your company hasn't closed a deal this large As many scenarios as the conscious mind can think of to guard against, it will. In doing so, it kills any hopeful thought before it takes root. Contrary to how it sounds, the conscious mind is not doing this to harm you but to help you. It’s weighing as much information as it can to make sure you’re safe and comfortable. If the conscious mind thinks that a loss of income on this deal is a safety concern, it will do all it can to guard against that, including act like you will not be getting it. Instead of acting upon a healthy seed you could have planted in the subconscious mind, the body acts in accordance with what the critical mind says. The subconscious mind is a state of mind and not necessarily a place in the brain. The subconscious mind is a reference to a frame of mind between conscious, aware thought, and unconsciousness. The imagination "lives" (for lack of a better term) within the subconscious mind. One of the most crucial pieces of being a good influence is understanding a key function of the subconscious mind. It believes what it’s told. The subconscious mind doesn’t know the difference between fantasy and reality; it just believes the story; it’s told and acts in accordance with that story. What this means for you, positive persuader is that if you keep feeding yourself negative stories about losing and staying down, your subconscious mind believes this. It acts in accordance with this belief, finding evidence of this around you and shouting for your attention: “You were right, you’ll never be confident! You were right. These people don’t respect you! You were right. You have no control over this!” What's more, it's not only your subconscious that acts in accordance with these thoughts you continue to repeat. Your body begins to obey these thoughts, as well. Soon, mentally and physically, you’re living the same negative story you’ve been repeating in self talk and out loud to others. But this isn’t bad news. If the mind believes what it’s told, then you can tell it positive and beneficial ideas and stories. Your subconscious mind and your body will begin to respond to and act in accordance with those ideas instead. To illustrate more clearly, think of a movie you’ve watched that has such a sad or touching moment that you actually end up crying or feeling emotional. Your logical, conscious mind knows it’s only a movie or a story. This is why you don’t actually run and hide during the scary scenes. This is why you don’t actually call 911 for help when a character gets hurt. It’s your logical mind that determines the experience is just a story and not a real circumstance for you to manage. The subconscious mind is different. It does not distinguish between the movie and the real life circumstance. The subconscious mind only cares about the story and the emotions and characters involved. So, when you come to the part of the story that brings you to tears, this is the work of the subconscious mind. The subconscious mind believes the story that is being told and starts to produce emotions and feelings to accompany the story. Though the subconscious mind believes the stories you tell it, especially in the alpha or theta states, you cannot easily go against someone’s core belief structure, or it will be disruptive and cause the critical mind to re engage. This would pull a person from an alpha theta state into a beta state pretty quickly. Your subconscious mind is an imaginary genius. It becomes so engaged in the emotion and the story that it prompts your body to respond to these emotions physiologically. The body literally begins to cry because the subconscious mind is experiencing sadness, despite the sadness not being real. Using the subconscious mind is a critical skill for the skilled reader of others and the influence of interactions. The unconscious mind is a bit of a mystery to psychology, but as we continue to explore, we find the unconscious mind to be wider and deeper than we could have expected. Comprehensive studies have been conducted, and evidence gathered to suggest the unconscious mind is where we store instincts and automatic reactions, as well as hidden phobias and desires. It’s also suggested that the unconscious mind is where we hold repressed feelings and psychological complexes. It is in the unconscious mind where subliminal perception takes place. The concept of the unconscious mind has become a part of our language and culture through the famous works of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud, and Carl Jung. Jung, and especially Freud, would frequently tap into the unconscious minds of patients by analyzing dreams and forgotten memories. You’re likely familiar with “the Freudian slip,” which is another revealing act of the unconscious. A Freudian slip is a slip of the tongue that reveals, unconsciously, your true feelings about a subject. This usually comes out as a word you didn’t mean to say, instead of the word you tried to say. The unconscious mind is also the resting place for trillions of bits of information collected throughout a lifetime and organized into a pattern. To organize patterns, the mind groups information into stories. It’s suggested that by putting information into the form of a story, complete with emotion, the brain is able to process and store a higher concentration of information. Humans have an inherent need to organize information in story form, consciously, and unconsciously. If we know the mind in all of its forms is strong with organizing a story format, then we, as influencers and persuaders, can use this information. When you want to get the point across, try telling it as a story and see if this is a more effective method for getting at your audience with emotion. The subconscious mind willingly follows the storyline and believes what it’s told, so be sure to plan deliberately, what your message will convey. Chapter 6. Intricacies of the Face The Head: n human anatomy, this part of the body consists of a skull and other attached outer bone and cartilage components (including a lower jaw). The head is connected to the spinal column by a cervical vertebra, atlas, and attached to the body muscles, blood vessels, and nerves that establish the neck. This area of the body serves to protect the brain. The term “head” can also be used to explain the anterior of animals and not only humans. It weighs 5 to 11 pounds (2.3 to 5.0kg). The face sits on the front and consists of the eyes, nose, and mouth. The mouth has a fleshy border to the oral void. Ears are present on either side of the skull. Blood supply to the head is accomplished through internal and external carotid arteries. “Internal” refers to the inside of the skull, while “external” is on the outside. Areas in the scalp receive blood from the vertebral arteries that go up through the cervical vertebrae. Twelve pairs of cranial nerves provide mainstream nervous control to the head. Face sensation is given via branches of the trigeminal nerve. The cutaneous innervation of the head is like this: e Maxillary nerve e Cervical plexus e Ophthalmic nerve e Dorsal Rami of Cervical Nerves e Mandibular Nerve The head consists of two eyes, two ears, one nose, and tongue inside the mouth. The skull houses the brain. All of these previously mentioned organs are the processing center for the human body. Data is collected through the various orifices and then interpreted in the brain. Humans are capable of processing data so quickly, with the help of the central nerve cluster. The Face The human face is considered to be a distinctive feature that helps in the identification of others. We have short and retracted faces underneath a huge braincase. We will resemble those to whom we are related, but every visage is different. The facial skeleton is formed by fourteen solo bones that consist of respiratory, digestive, olfactory, and visual systems. A vital understanding of the evolution of the human face in the hominin clade in the past 6 million years can be gained through the study of ancient bones. As more fossils are being unearthed and many more hominin species are discovered, there are still doubts about how the current human face came about. By looking at the re created faces of our ancestors, we can begin to understand their connection to us. Ancient civilizations survived through the same social interaction that we are learning about today. They lived their own lives in pursuit of happiness and partnership. Human communication has changed dramatically throughout the eras, yet we are the same at our core. Our civilization is still full of drama and intrigue. We are still fighting for the things that matter to us. Our faces are now, as they were then, a window to deeply complex creatures. What is in a visage? We memorize the look of those we interact with, so that we are able to recognize them. We use our own to show others when we are elated and when we are repulsed. These emotions radiate from us like a ripple through a disturbed lake. Standard Facial Signals for Different Emotions Reading the facial features of another can allow us access to their innermost thoughts. Learning this skill will be incredibly helpful in both a profession and a personal context. It is imperative to remember that, while you may know what someone else is feeling, you don’t necessarily understand why. You could interpret someone’s movements as being closed off without knowing anything else about them. They could have had an awful day. This individual could have received terrible news just before your interaction. Learning about these displays can give you a massive insight into your own interactions. You can watch others react to your professional pitches, in real time. Being cognizant of the impact that you have upon others, can allow you to ace tough situations. We will be learning about deciphering the emotions of others. a. Universal emotions Research says that there are worldwide facial expressions that bound across cultural borders. Even blind people will use similar facials to show their interpretation of emotions such as: Surprise e ourprise e Disgust e Anger e Eear e Contempt e Sadness e Happiness By practicing these various expressions that coincide with their respective emotions, you can be in a better position to read them from other people. b. Micro expressions Not all the feelings stick around for an extended period of time. Emotions that seem to blink in and then immediately out of existence are referred to as micro expressions. These can be instinctual blimps on your radar. The subconscious will interpret threatening behavior in others, even when you would rather not know. c. Eyebrows Others can’t help but react to stimuli using their eyebrows; they may be raised and arched to show surprise or lowered and knit together to show anger. The inner corners of the eyes may be drawn up to express sadness. d. Eyes The eyes will be able to tell you even more about an individual than the brows. When they are wide open, they will be expressing surprise. If you are staring intensely, then you are angry and when you have crow feet crinkles, then you are happy. Many people show fear or romantic feelings by blinking, and when they blink rapidly, it’s an extension of being dishonest or being stressed. e. Mouth This is another essential instrument in the quest to understand the thoughts and feelings of others. When the jaw has dropped open, a person is reacting with surprise. Fear is displayed through an open mouthed gasp. When one side of the mouth is raised that's a sign of hatred. The corners of the mouth will turn up to indicate happiness and down to show the opposite. Anxiety will manifest through lip and cheek biting. People often purse their lips to show distaste. Covering the mouth can show that you are keeping a secret. Common Facial Signals for Different Emotions: Common signs of Anxiety If a person is anxious, their eyes may dampen. They likely won’t cry, but they may have a glisten to them. Their eyebrows will likely be tightly knit, and their lower lip may tremble. You might notice a slightly wrinkled chin, as well as a tight mouth. Their face will likely be pointed downward as they try to avoid looking at what is making them anxious, or anyone else noticing how they’re feeling. Common signs of Fear Someone who is afraid will have their eyes wide and they will be pointing downward. Their mouth will likely be opened, or they will be slightly frowning. Their eyebrows will be raised, and their chin will be pulled in. You will also notice the color from their face disappears as they look pale, and their head will likely be pointing down. Common signs of Anger If a person is angry, their eyes will widen. They will be staring at the subject of their anger, likely with their eyebrows pressed together toward the middle of their face. Their forehead will be wrinkled, and you may even see their nostrils flaring if they are angry enough. Their mouth will be tightly pursed, or it may be open with tight lips as they show their clenched teeth. Usually, their chin will be jut forward, and their face will start showing some red color. Common signs of Happiness Someone who is happy, or content will be smiling. They may have a wide open smile, or a small and subtler smile depending on how happy they are in the moment. They are likely laughing, or they are easier to make laugh than people experiencing other emotions. They will get crow’s feet on the sides of their eyes, as this is proof, they are genuinely smiling. Their eyes may look like they have a sparkle to them, and their eyebrows will be subtly raised. Their head is even and looking forward. Common signs of Sadness People who are sad have a tendency to avoid eye contact. For this reason, they are often looking down. They may be crying, or their eyes may simply be tearful as if they are about to cry. Their lips will likely be pinched as they are trying to hold in the emotion, and their head will likely be down or turned away from the people around them. Common signs of Desire When someone is experiencing the emotion of desire, their eyes widen, and their pupils dilate. Their eyebrows are typically raised slightly, showing that they are interested in the person in front of them. Their lips will likely part slightly, or they may be puckered. They may even be smiling, depending on what is happening in the moment. Their head is usually tilted forward as though they are trying to get closer to that which they are feeling desirable for. Common signs of Interest When someone is feeling interested in someone or something, they tend to have a very consistent gaze ahead of them. Their eyes may even squint as they show full attention to the subject of their interest. Their eyebrows will likely be subtly raised, further opening their expression. You may also notice they have their lips pressed together, and their head is pushed forward as they try and get closer to the subject of their interest. Common signs of Boredom People who are bored tend to look away with an expressionless face. They may appear as though they are not looking at anything in particular, and yet they are looking intently. This is because they are deep in thought, trying to remove themselves from the situation that is boring them. They may have a slight frown on their face. If they are especially bored, they may have their head resting on something such as their hand. Common signs of Surprise People who are surprised tend to have a very open expression. Their lips may be slightly parted, their eyebrows are raised, and their eyes are wide. Their head may even be tilted to the side or backward. Common signs of Disgust People who are feeling disgusted often have their head turned away from what is causing their emotions to boil. They likely have flaring nostrils and their nose twisted up, with a tightly closed mouth. They may even push their tongue up against the back of their lips. Their chin is usually jutting forward. Common signs of Pity When someone is feeling pity for someone else, they tend to have a very soft and sad look. Their eyes are typically soft and focused, and they may be damp. Their eyebrows might pull together slightly in the middle, and their head will likely be turned to one side. Chapter 7. Truth and Relationships Lying eing able to tell if somebody is lying to another person is a very important and powerful skill. Within a relationship lying, is unfortunately very common and very often seen in modern day society. Being able to tell when an individual is lying may save you from painful and possibly emotionally damaging relationships. It is easier to detect if someone is lying when you are outside of the relationship, but you can also use these tactics when you are inside it as well. The following are a few signs that a person is lying to their significant other: A common scientific sign that somebody’s lying is seen within the nose. Specific tissues within the nose are known to get engorged or to swell up when an individual is lying. Because of the swelling, a person’s cells within their nose tend to release histamine, which will make the nose feel itchy. Because of this, an individual may be seen scratching or touching their nose. This indicator is not a tell all be all of somebody lying. You need to take the sign in contact with many other symbols of lying. Another big sign that somebody is lying is a tendency to cover or block their mouth or to cover or rub their eyes. This is often done subconsciously, in hopes that a person would not be able to see those parts of their face and that they wouldn’t be able to tell that they are lying. They may also turn their head or body away when making crucial statements that, if seen past, will definitively suggest that they are lying. An individual may be known to overbearingly refer to certain religious phrases in order to make their lie sound more plausible. These are phrases such as: “I swear on my mother's grave” or “God, no.” By adding religion or the afterlife into a Statement, a person increases the weight of that statement and, as such, makes the other individual think that they are sincere. Phrases of denial such as “trust me,” “honestly,” “and to be perfectly honest” are attempts at being evasive and trying to avoid the original subject matter. If a person is attempting to change the perception of others about their actions, they may use these different evasive techniques. If these phrases are being repeated in excess and are popping up over and over, they may be clues that a person is lying. Individual appearing to be overly defensive or to overreact at certain situations that seem completely random to you may be a sign that they are lying. An example of this would be if an individual you're in a romantic relationship with gets off the phone—and when you ask who they were talking to, they’d respond with some type of hostile statement such as “Why are you so nosey?” A response such as this is completely uncalled for and indicates that a person is feeling guilty about a certain situation. For this instance, this individual is also appearing to try to place their feelings of guilt and mistrust onto the other person. This is an instant sign that a person is lying to you. If an individual has a well known and long winded history of lying, then they are more likely to be lying to you. People often continue to do what they know well, and if a person knows how to live very well, it is very likely that they will lie to you. If a person makes an exaggerated or extreme amount of eye contact, they may be lying to you. The common misconception is that people will avoid eye contact upon being embarrassed or ashamed. Because so many people know about this fact, people who are trying to keep something from you will actually do the opposite. They will go out of their way and try to make eye contact with you under any means necessary. This is an attempt to make themselves appear sincerer than they actually are. It is important to cautiously approach an individual who normally doesn’t give much eye contact and then suddenly does a lot now. A person will often touch their face when they are lying. This is an attempt to put something in between them and the person they're lying to. This subconsciously makes it easier to lie to a person because they feel as though they are not directly doing it. An individual trying to make a lie seem very believable and sincere may give a fake smile to a person. A way of being able to tell if somebody is lying through a fake smile is by looking for a smile that happens around the mouth but does not meet the eyes. This means that their cheeks or eyes may be without wrinkles or maybe particularly relax. This is a sign they are trying to force something. If an individual’s pupils are dilating while they are speaking, this is a sign that they are feeling a very strong emotion. If combined with other telltale signs of lying, this may be a sign that an individual is lying to you. You have to be careful with this sort of signal because pupils may dilate for a number of different reasons. Typically, eyes will dilate for any sort of strong or overwhelming emotion. Because of this, an overwhelming feeling of shame or embarrassment will make a person's eyes dilate. As said, if combined with other signs of lying, this may, indeed, be an indicator that a person is lying. If not, this may simply be an indication that a person feels very strongly about you. Saying the word “honestly” too often in a conversation can be an indicator that somebody is lying. By saying the word “honest” over and over again, a person is subconsciously trying to convince you that they are honest. Because of how hard they are trying to do this; they may overcompensate and say it too many times to be believable. If you would like to be able to detect a liar very quickly, a good place to start is by asking very neutral questions. By asking a basic or non threatening question, you will be able to observe a baseline response for the person telling the truth carefully. Asking them about things like the weather, their plans, or anything that would elicit a comfortable, easy response will give you a baseline understanding of what their body language is when they're telling the truth. You should continue this until you find a series of patterns that match their continuous truth telling tendencies. The following step in trying to detect a liar very quickly is to move into emotionally charged questions. During this time, you should observe the presence or absence of changes in body language, facial expressions, eye movements, and even the way that they formulate their sentences. If any of this is inconsistent with the information that you gathered, by asking merely the easy questions, you may be looking at a liar. When trying to indicate or evaluate a liar, it is important to listen very closely to the tone, cadence, and even the sentence structures of the person speaking to you. A person who is lying may slightly change the tone or speed of their speech. They will do this subconsciously. A person trying to speak more quickly when lying will be doing so to try and get the lies out of them and get it over with as quickly as possible. A person speaking in a slower tone may be doing so because they are trying to think about what they're going to say and are overly conscious about the movements of their body. A person that is lying will often start to remove themselves from their tale when answering your questions. They will try to direct the focus on to the people around them. You will begin to hear fewer I’s and me’s as they try to distance themselves from the lie that they are telling subconsciously. Ways to Analyze the Truthfulness of a Relationship It is very difficult to analyze a relationship when you are in one. This segment will cover both the man and the woman. You will learn how to tell and analyze if there are inconsistencies within their relationship such as infertility and cheating. We will begin with a few questions that are crucial to making this analysis possible. 1. Is there trust? Trust is a crucial part of every relationship. In order to properly analyze your relationship, you have to know whether or not there is trust within it. How to tell if there's trust in a relationship is by examining it and seeing if the individuals within are able to be apart from one another easily and comfortably without any worries. They may miss each other but not to the point that they are constantly asking each other what they are doing. They do not feel happier when they're away from their partner, but they also do not feel insecure for the same reason. Insecurities are key here. A person that is ina loving and healthy relationship will not feel insecure simply because of their significant other is not with them. If a person feels insecure every single time that they are away from their partner, this may be a sign that they do not trust that individual to make good decisions on their own. 2. Are they on the same page? Obviously, in good relationships, you do not always have to agree. However, it is important to have similar goals and similar views of the future. If a pair of individuals have very different ideas of their future and very different views for their lives, it may cause problems within a relationship down the road. It is very difficult to continue a long term relationship with somebody who wants a very different future from another person. 3. Do they have respect for one another? Respect is very important in a relationship. Respect can be defined as being fond of the essence of a person without wanting to change them. An individual who respects their partner will be willing to put aside any kind of issues that a person has or any little quirks or flaws that are a part of their personality. In fact, it is best in a relationship when a person finds these flaws or quirks to be beautiful. However, if an individual puts down their significant other because of their flaws are quirks, this is a sign that they are not truly in love with them. . Can they speak openly with one another? Good, positive communication is an absolute must have for a good relationship. If a couple that is together cannot have good communication with each other, it is very likely that they will not last very long. Good communication is when two individuals are able to speak about anything and everything that is on their minds, and they will not be shut down or told to stop speaking. The other person will listen intently and will give their side as well. There should be no boundaries on what these two can speak about with each other. . Are they equals? Equality is very important in modern day relationships. Putting the same amount of work into a relationship is very important. If the work within the relationship is equally distributed amongst the two people, then they will have a much happier relationship. However, if one person is carrying the relationship or if the other person is leaning very heavily on the former’s actions, they will begin to feel bogged down and will eventually feel as though their significant other is more of a chore than a relationship. Never should a person in a relationship feel as though they have to do something for their partner just because their partner wants them to. However, they should want to do something nice for their partner because they love them. If they begin to feel resentful for the things that they do for their partner, that might be a sign that they should end the relationship soon. . Do they enjoy being together? This one is fairly simple and obvious to understand. People in a relationship together should be able to enjoy and appreciate the simple things. You should want to be around your partner—it should feel somewhat “empty” if your partner is away from you, and it should feel happy just because you are around them. 7. Are they comfortable being themselves? This one is very important in a relationship. If a person is uncomfortable in their own relationship, then it is not likely to last very long. A person should not mind showing their weaknesses to their partner. Their partner should also be very supportive of that person's weaknesses and vice versa. Another way to tell that there is comfort in a relationship is that if things are not going right for a certain person, they should go to their partner for comforting. If an individual is feeling anxious or self conscious around their significant other, then it might be a sign to end the relationship soon. Individuals in a very good relationship with one another and are very comfortable with each other’s company will usually understand their partner without having to speak a word. 8. Do they bring out the best in each other? Individuals that are in a good relationship with each another should be able to complement their partner very well. Being with another person should make you strive to be a better person and should not make you feel bogged down as though you are being pulled in a worse direction by being with them. By beginning with these questions, you should be able to analyze a relationship from the outside carefully. Keep in mind that those that are in a relationship will know the background of their connection the best. Hence, begin with these questions when trying to analyze another relationship, but always take into account the understanding of those within it. How to Tell If Love Is Truly There Using the analysis questions, we can begin to figure out and understand if love is truly present in a relationship. This is obviously very important for long lasting and comfortable relationships. If love is not actually present and if the individuals in the relationship are mistaking lust for love, there can be serious problems. With this being said, love is sometimes difficult to understand and to pinpoint. That's why we will go through some easy ways to tell if there really is love present in a relationship. 1. When the individuals within a relationship want to spend time with each other and want to spend the majority of their day spending quality time with the other person, this is probably an indicator of true love. This desire and need to spend time with each other are a sign of successful long term intimacy. If the individuals in question truly care about each other, they will make time to spend with one another in between all of their daily commitments. 2. Individuals that are truly in love with one another in a relationship will ask about the other person's day. This may seem like a very simplistic and easy way to tell if there is true love in a relationship—and it is. This is because by asking about a person's day, you are showing interest in that person's life. This is a very important sign of love. If an individual does not care enough to ask a person about their day, then they do not care about the inner workings of that person's life and are not truly in love with them. 3. Trust is very important in good and strong relationship partners who truly and deeply care about each other and will give the other person in their relationship the benefit of the doubt. Research has shown in the past that the majority of successful and long term relationships have one thing in common—that is a deep and powerful trust between the individuals involved. If individuals feel as though the other person in the relationship does not trust them, it will make them not want to trust them in turn. This level of distrust within a relationship will destroy it very quickly. If a person feels as though they’re not being trusted and are being questioned at every turn, they may feel trapped in a relationship and may want to end it very quickly. . Individuals in a relationship in which they care very deeply for and truly love each other will be more than willing to offer help when the other person needs it. Oftentimes, an individual will not have to ask for this help, as the other person will simply offer it up in the first place. This is a very beautiful and strong sign of love. This is because a person who offers help when somebody needs it is clearly paying attention to the needs of that person and wants that individual to be happy and healthy at all times. Because of these wants and needs, that person will offer to help them despite the inconveniences that they put upon themselves. . Individuals in a relationship do not necessarily always have to agree on everything, but they should show respect for the other person’s views. Strong love in a relationship can show itself— and individuals that, while they disagree, will also be respectful and not put down the ideas or beliefs of the other person. Chapter 8. Confidence and How It Is Displayed Displaying Confidence Posture osture is very important in the appearance of confidence. An individual's posture can say a lot about their perceived level of confidence. Confident posture is defined by legs that are lined with the individual’s shoulders and feet approximately four to six inches apart. Weight is typically distributed equally on both legs, and shoulders are pushed back slightly. A straight back is also very typical of someone with extreme confidence. Individuals with this sort of posture are considered assertive and tend to project confidence. This is because an individual with this posture is seen as being able to “stand tall” regardless of their height and are also perceived as being very open to those that are talking to them, as they are unafraid of any attacks or criticism. Hands Hands are very important in trying to appear confident. It is important to remember when trying to display confidence through your hands to keep them calm and still. Rapidly moving one’s hands is a sign of nervousness or anxiety. Eye Contact Having the ability to maintain long and strong eye contact with another is a very good sign that an individual is feeling confident. This is because showing eye contact with another person is a very vulnerable feeling and position. This is because our eyes can show a lot about how we actually feel in a situation. By maintaining good eye contact, we are showing to the other person that we are unafraid of what they may see within our eyes. This is a sign of extreme confidence, as it shows that you are self assured in your feelings and believes that you are unafraid of how a person will interpret what they see in your eyes. Mirroring Body Language Mirroring the body language of those around us elicits a sort of understanding and seeks acceptance from those around us. This raises our confidence level as we humans strive to be liked by those around us. Because those around us will subconsciously begin to like us more by mirroring their body language, they will also be confident because of their positive view of us. Fidgeting It is very important to remember not to fidget when you are trying to display levels of confidence. Fidgeting in any form—no matter what part of your body is doing the movement—shows signs of nervousness and anxiety. In addition to this, it can simply annoy those around us. People are often irritated by constant rhythmic tapping or brushing noises. This is something to keep in mind if you are an individual who likes to bounce their leg or tap their foot at simple moments. Ways to Spot a Lack of Confidence in a Person A very common sign of lack of confidence in an individual is if they are constantly touching their phone while in social situations or while alone. If an individual finds themselves unable to sit still during a social situation in which they don't know very many people, this may be a sign that they lack confidence. Checking their phone is a sign that they feel uncomfortable in a social situation and are unable to connect with those around them. Another sign of a lack of confidence in an individual is a quick backing down during a disagreement to avoid arguing with another person. An individual with an extreme lack of confidence will not want to cause problems with a person that they disagree with. Because of this, they often negotiate their views in order to avoid conflict. This shows that a person lacks confidence because they are not assured in their own opinions and would rather back down than express themselves honestly. Another common sign of a lack of confidence in an individual is their inability to leave their homes without any sort of makeup or hairstyling. This is a very obvious sign of a lack of confidence because it shows that an individual doesn't feel that they are worth being looked at unless they have something on their bodies or face to make them look more beautiful. Putting makeup on or doing their hair gives a false sense of self esteem to an individual, which people with low self esteem or confidence rely on very heavily? An individual with low confidence will also tend to take constructive criticism far too personally. If a person gives this individual constructive criticism about something, they will take it way too seriously and will end up feeling very strong negative emotions. This is a huge sign of low confidence and low self esteem because this individual is not emotionally balanced enough to handle constructive criticism from those around them. Individuals who have low confidence or self esteem will also find themselves afraid to contribute their opinion in a conversation. They will often second guess themselves before they say anything instead of diving into an interesting conversation. They may find themselves stuttering or putting themselves down. This is because these individuals don't know how well their opinions will be received and are afraid of other people taking their opinions negatively. This is a sign of low confidence or self esteem because these individuals care very deeply about how the people, they make contact with view them. Individuals who have difficulty with confidence also find themselves extremely indecisive with very simple and basic decisions. They may change their minds very often after coming to a decision. This is a sign of low self confidence because this individual cannot trust their own opinions or decisions. This is especially a sign of low self confidence when this applies to very simple tasks or simple decisions. Individuals with low self confidence will also have extreme difficulty handling genuine compliments from those around them. They tend not to think that they are worthy of such good compliment, and they usually put them down or not accept them. Individuals struggling with low self confidence will also tend to give up very soon with things that they are trying to do or achieve. They may have goals and dreams that they want to accomplish but will give up before they even really begin. This is a sign of low self confidence because they do not believe that they have the ability to accomplish these goals and dreams before they even start. Individuals that struggle with low self confidence will also tend to compare themselves with those around them. They tend to have very strong attention to the people that are doing better than them and will point out all of the ways that they are not doing as well as those around them. This is a strong sign of low self confidence because it says that the person in question does not view themselves as very successful or doing very well in their life. Slouching is a very common display of low self confidence in an individual. Why so? It is because lowering the center of a person's body is a sign that a person is not willing to hold up the weight of their upper body themselves. It sends off a signal that that individual is not proud of himself/herself. Because of these things, this is a big sign of low self confidence. In order to detect low self confidence in an individual, all you have to do is look out for some of these common signs of low self esteem and self confidence. You can also detect low self confidence or low self esteem within yourself by looking out for these common signs. If you find that you or someone you know has low self esteem or confidence, you can begin to work on them by saying very positive statements about yourself on a regular basis. Chapter 9. How to Fake Your Body Language: Taking In A Deep Breath hen talking to someone whether you are giving a speech to the audience or you are listening to them, you should watch both the breathing rate and the other persons. The breathing rate of a person tells much about your emotions. Breathing of a person and his emotions are highly connected so you must be very careful with your rate of breathing if you want to fake it. When someone breaths deeply, it might show that he is afraid. A person holding his breath for some time than breathing deeply shows that the person is afraid. For example, a child who knows that after telling his mother that he licked sugar will be beaten, no matter how the mother asks him; he will simply breathe deeply without speaking. He is sending a message to his mother that he is afraid that if he speaks, he will be beaten. So if you are afraid and you do not want to show the other person, you want to feel more superior, you want to prove that you are not afraid of doing anything or you are not afraid of the other person, make sure your breathing rate is balanced. You should not breathe in deeply once after he has asked a question, take time breathing normally, you can hold your breath a little bit then start breathing normally, someone won’t recognize the fear you are experiencing. Taking a deep breath may also signify anger. When someone is angry, he has no control over the thing or the one upsetting him. Just like fear, anger is emotional and like we said emotional feelings are connected to breathing. When you are so upset and so angry, watch your breathing rate if you do not want to show it. To fake your breathing rate, you can smile a bit and sip some water if there is any in the glass instead of breathing deeply. Maintain your eye contact and think of funny things in your past, use humor, like crack a funny joke when the person aiming to make you angry says an awful thing, you can also repeat a calming phrase within your head like ‘take is fine, take it easy’. This will help calm you down and you will realize your breathing rate is normal. Deep breath also shows excitement. This could be excitement from receiving after party. You sit down to think about it, you hold your breath while thinking about it then you breathe in so deeply. You are excited that it was a wonderful party, but if you happened to sneak out of the house and go for this wonderful party and you come back to find your parents waiting for you, you have to fake it because party on a school day is guaranteed with punishment. To fake it you should make sure you do not breathe deep in with a wide smile on your face. Not doing this will make your parents see your excitement and know what you were up to. When someone is relieved, he is likely to take a deep breath. Thus, taking a deep breath signifies relief. You may have been fighting with someone over a piece of land for a year, and then he comes to you and says he has let it go, you can have it. This is a relief. You will take a deep breath for that. You can always fake this so that he can see how tiring the case was to you. When you breathe in deeply, it might also show shock, surprise which is always accompanied by a head sign, love attraction, hopelessness or sadness. If you have to fake all these, you must make sure your breathing stays normal no matter how much these feelings flood your mind. To make sure you want to fake all your emotional traumas or feelings without anyone knowing they are fake; it is also good that you identify your emotional triggers. This will help you be in charge of your emotions and each time any trigger is pressed, you will find yourself smiling about it and it will not affect you. This way you would have faked it beyond any doubt. Controlling the movement of your eyebrows The eyebrow movement will tell what you are thinking and the message you are trying to pass across. By lowering your eyebrows when speaking to someone it will send a variety of messages. When your eyebrows are lowered, it shows deception. You will be concealing something from the audience or the speaker. If you want to fake this even if you are hiding something, make sure your eyebrows are raised humbly. This will send a different message. Lowered eyebrows also show desire. The desire that the eyes cannot see or are afraid to view. A person lowering eyebrows may also be annoyed. Annoyance may be caused by a variety of things and he is afraid that if he raises his eyes he might cry or be tempted to say something bad. If you want to fake it so that nobody can know if you are annoyed, you can start breathing in and then out as you count, or focus on the main aim of the conversation and you will realize that your annoyance is subsiding and while doing all this, let ensure your eyebrows haven’t changed their former position. Raised eyebrows may signify attention request or demand depending on the question posed before the raising. Demanding for attention with raised eyebrows is seen rude sometimes especially if it is coming from a child to a parent or a younger person to an older on so you should be careful if you have this habit. Faking this raising of eyebrows when asking for attention, you may show attraction instead, when someone sees attraction in the eyes, he will give the attention you want. This attraction can be done by raising your eyebrows to expose your eyes. Submission can also be symbolized by raised eyebrows. For example, a person asking you if you are going to lend him money, and you raise tour eyebrows. This means you have submitted to his request and he will get the money. But if you do not want the person to see that you are forcing this submission, you can as well lower your eyebrows, he will be confused and wont tell if it is a yes or no or you can raise your eyebrows with the eyes looking up, this will tell the person that you are thinking about it. Raising one eyebrow can also indicate cynicism especially when the other person is speaking inaccurately. The other person may feel offended if he saw you cynically raising your eyebrows thus to fake it, you can stay with your eyebrows normal but focus your mind on something else. When he is done talking you greet each other and leave like nothing ever happened. Most of the psychologists use this faking especially to the clients who are so depressed and are speaking things that do not make sense, the psychologists even go ahead and nod their heads while the clients are speaking then they can now paraphrase their words to get clarification otherwise raising one eyebrow to them will confuse them more and they will be annoyed that they are not getting the help they needed. Pushing together your eyebrows and pulling up your forehead indicated relief. For example, you have been waiting for a whole day for some news from the interview you attended, then finally the results come, and you have passed. This is a great relief and you will feel your nerves calming down. This way your eyebrows will be pushed together, and forehead pulled up. To make sure that someone believes in this you as it is written. Anxiety can also be seen when the eyebrows are pushed together, and the forehead pulled up. You can fake anxiety especially when you want to get out of a boring meeting that you have by saying you have to see a doctor. The show of anxiety on your face can get you permission to step out. Relaxing your face A relaxed face is not a compressed face. A relaxed face can easily be seen by the facial muscles. The muscles are flexed, the eyebrows not clenched together, the forehead is not wrinkled or creased, the eyes are not tensed, and the lips are full. All these describe a relaxed face. If anything from the above is opposite, this means you do not have a relaxed face, and anyone can be able to tell what is bothering you. To fake a relaxed face, you have to understand the following facial meanings. A relaxed face shows control of emotions. It tells that you are in control of what is going on around you. For example, you indulge in an argument at the office with your co worker, the shouting is so high from your fellow worker that the other workers come in, just by the calmness on your face, and the other workers will see control of your emotions. They will know that you have the situation under control, and it is not bothering you. If you are a businessperson and you want to show people that they can count on you, you must have a relaxed face. Relaxed faces show responsibility. Especially when there is a problem in the office and people are confused, by maintaining a relaxed face, people tend to see you as more responsible and they will be counting on you to provide the solutions to any problems arising. Most magnetic leaders are experts at this. They always maintain calm faces even when the going is so rough because they know people are counting on them. When you are in control of things happening around you it is seen from your calm face. For example, you receive a call from the office that the workers are rioting, the police have been called to disburse then, but the situation is still rampant. S you decide to go to the office, with a calm face you call upon the workers, and they all stop whatever they are doing and start listening to you address their concerns. The calmness on your face will tell anyone that comes to that meeting that you have got control over your face even when deep within you know you are not calm. If you want people to respect you, make sure your face is calm especially during stress. When you are so hurt and stressed up, people will always see it on your face. But when your face seems so calm with no sign of stress, this will pull them towards you, they will respect you and most of them will want to emulate you. They will see a person that is a good example who is in control and can lead. A calm face will also make someone see honesty in you. When you are speaking to someone after a mistake has been committed, your face will let the person know if you are honest or not. For example, in school, when something wrong has happened and the teacher calls you to the staffroom, the calmness of your face will teacher that you are honest in whatever you are saying. So, faking a calm face will make you get anything you want to. The Smile It is important to spend some time focusing on the smile that you give off. Many of us have been trained on how to give a fake smile in any situation, but there is a big difference between the fake smile and a genuine smile. You may be able to fake it with some people, but often, you need to try and get a real and genuine smile on your face to impress those around you. Remember that with a genuine smile, you need to use more than the sides of the mouth. This one includes the whole face and even some crinkles around the eyes. This can be done even when faking it, but you need to do some practice. An excellent way to do this is to spend some time in a mirror, working on the smile, and trying to get the whole face into it. Doing a smile in front of the mirror is going to make a big difference. You can look at how the smile will appear to others and get a general feel of how it is going to feel to do this. Then, when you are in front of someone else using this smile, without the mirror present, you will know how to make this smile appear for you. Speaking In Balanced Tones Tones involve the volume you use and the emphasis you place on every word. When the emphasis is placed on different words, the meanings of words change. When different tones are applied to different words, it changes the emotional influence on the words. For example, someone saying politely while joking ‘you are stupid’ it will sound funny and a joke and emotionally it won’t hurt you unlike someone speaking in a firm tone with serious telling you the same. The emotional attachment to the first incidence and the second incidence differs because of tonal variation. Supporting Your Head How you support your head while talking tells more than you think. When your head is supported at the chin position horizontally with the chin lifted, this is a show of superiority. Most managers like sitting in this position in the meetings while listening to the views of the junior staff. This is an expression that they are superior over the others. Faking this is easy as long as you do not lose your focus. When you clasp your hands at the back of your head with the elbows spread out, this indicates that you are confident enough. You are confident about what you are talking about and at the same time, it signifies superiority and dominance. For example, a person is trying to send the message that ’I know this very wee and I am the boss’. This happens mostly after someone has finished a certain project. Sometimes clasping the hands at the back of your head while facing the opposite side of a person who is demanding something from you may show submission. This is mostly seen when the police are making arrests. The police tell you to put your hands at the back of your head so that they can search for you. When you comply, it shows you have submitted to the command or request of the being issued. When you support your head sideways it sends different messages. You could be tired, and you just need some relaxing especially when you support your head with your eyes closed. It could also mean that you are indeed thought when you support your head with your hands on your forehead looking down. Supporting your head sideways with focus on the speaker and a smile can also indicate admiration. This happens mostly when people are on a love date. Supporting your head by putting the hands on your head may show regret. This mostly is seen when football players have missed a penalty or a goal chance. Your Stance The last thing that we are going to look at is your stance. You need to make sure that you are picking out the right kind of stance to impress another person and let them know that you are interested. Of course, the posture is going to be an important part of all of this. You want to stand upright, rather than to slouch, and you want to make sure that you show off the confidence that is inside of you. There is more to this one than just the posture that you use, though. If you can add a few more things into this, you will find out that it is going to help you to get some results with how comfortable others are around you. The first thing to look at is your feet. If you want the other person to think that you are interested in them and that your whole attention is on them, then make sure the feet are pointed in the right direction. They need to be pointed at the person you are talking to, rather than to the side or even worse, towards the door. The way that you lean is important as well. If your posture has you leaning towards the door, or at all away from the other person, then this is going to give them the thought that you are not interested in them at all. But, if you are leaning slightly towards them, with your body leaning in, it shows that you are interested in what they are saying to them. It is hard to fake the body language that you are doing with another person. While we often wish to show off a certain kind of appearance to others, it is going to be tough to do this. You have to be careful about how you do this. But with some practice and tips shared here, you will become more aware of the different cues that our bodies are giving off to others, and it is a lot easier for you to give off the appearance that you would like. Chapter 10. Detecting Lying and Deception otably, each one of us would like to easily determine deception at any level such as personal, social, and organizational levels but it is not that easy. Some professions that rely wholly on determining the truth in personal and social contexts such as law agencies, health agencies, and media agencies invest heavily in determining the truth value of their productions, but they fairly fail despite having immense resources. However, if we go back, we will realize that human behavior is dynamic, and this implies that what proves a lie in one context may also prove the truth in another context. There is only one reliable way to determine lying and deception, and that is establishing a baseline for the target individual and comparing against this baseline as well as doing the adequate prior investigation before confronting the person. Unfortunately, creating a baseline for each and conducting relevant background study is not always assured due to the time factor and resource constraints and this implies that a speedy analysis of body language and verbal communication can help determine a likelihood of a truth or a lie. Verbal Hints of a Liar Liars Tend to Respond to Questions That Were Not Asked If a person is lying, then he or she wants to cover as much ground as possible, and this includes answering questions that were not posed. By answering questions that were not asked, the individual is prompting the speaker to a particular direction and does not want to be caught off guard. Answering questions that are not asked may also give the individual lying an opportunity to deny the speaker adequate time to analyze the answers given by continuously bombarding the interrogator with new information and ideas. Lastly, answering questions that were not asked also helps the layperson to appear well prepared and knowledgeable in what is being asked. Liars Tend to Answer a Question with a Question Expectedly, most liars will respond to a question with another question to shift the burden of thinking and responding to the interrogator. Most politicians employ this tactic when being interviewed, and it is meant to buy them enough time to recall information to the main question. For most liars, not responding is akin to affirming that they lack memory of what is being asked or what happened. The other purpose of responding to a question with another question is to irritate the interrogator and derail his or her composure. Responding to a question with a question is a defensive tactic indicating attempts to hide something. Most Liars Tend to Make Self corrections to Avoid Sounding Uncertain As indicated, most liars want to ensure that each area is covered to eliminate any doubts because allowing room for doubt may expose them. For this reason, most liars tend to self correct to ensure the information given is irrefutable. In most cases, liars will repeat the correction to ensure that the interrogator and the audience also capture the self correction. As expected, the liar will blame the need to self correct on a slip of the tongue or the fast nature of the interview. Another reason for self correction by a liar is that the individual has a premeditated script and outcome and keeps forcing everything to align with the premeditated picture. Liars Tend to Feign Memory Loss As expected, most liars need a safe escape button when cornered and feigning memory loss is a favorite excuse for most liars. When a liar is cornered, then he or she will cite memory loss and then institute self correction to attain the preformed script. Try watching interviews with politicians to appreciate how they feign memory loss to escape explaining something and pretend to have recalled the information when there is an opportunity to sound believable. Most Liars Tend to Report What They Did Not Do as Opposed to What They Did People that lie will give an account of what they did not do to avoid being held accountable. If a liar dwelled on what he or she did, then the individual can be held accountable, and this is not something that a liar wants. However, if a liar dwells on what they should have done, \ he or she has a large degree of freedom to give any answer and avoid scrutiny. Again, try watching a recorded or filed interview with any politician to appreciate how this technique is employed. Liars Tend to Justify Their Actions Even When Not Necessary Expectedly, most liars are insecure and are uncertain that they sound convincing. For this reason, they over justify everything because they feel that no one believes them even when people have fallen for the lies. When examining a potential liar, look for signs of unnecessary justification, and again, politicians will provide a good case study of over justification. Most Liars Avoid Mentioning Emotional Feelings in Their Version of Events Since a liar is faking everything, he or she will avoid mentioning feelings that were associated with what is being reported. Mentioning emotions may force one to show them. For instance, if you were talking about an exciting event that you witnessed, then your facial expressions and voice should manifest positive emotions, and this is not something a liar wants because he or she is not assured of the consistency of verbal communication and body language. Most Liars Are Careful, and Will Insist on a Question to Be Repeated Finally, liars focus more on what is being asked because they only want to accept a question that they are certain of responding to. Liars dwell more on what the question is and what the interrogator wants to help them generate convincing information. The other role of wanting questions repeated is to help the liar elicit a response by making up one because there is none. Nonverbal Hints of a Liar Liars Randomly Throw Gestures The hand gestures are among the best indicator of positive and negative emotions and are difficult to fake in a consistent manner. If one is angry but is pretending to be calm, he or she will throw gestures randomly. Most liars get irritated when taken to the task of what they just said and are likely to throw random gestures in the air even as they try to sound calm. Against the Norm, Liars Speak Faster than Usual People that normally do not speak fast will suddenly speak fast when they are lying. Speaking fast helps, the person denies the audience adequate time to listen and analyze the information. Speaking fast also allows the liar to exhaust all of the rehearsed information, as any interjection will throw the liar off balance. Speaking fast also indicates that the person is uncomfortable with the audience or the message and wants to finish fast and end the experience. Liars Sweat More Than Usual People sweat, and it is normal. However, more than normal levels of Sweating even when the weather is fine may indicate that one is panicking and feeling cornered. All these may indicate a sign of a liar. Liars Avoid Eye Contact Most liars shun eye contact or give a sustained stare to intimidate the target person. Shunning eye contact indicates that the person feels awkward or embarrassed about what he or she is presenting to the audience. Pacing Up and Down If one paces up and down more than necessary, then the individual is likely lying. All these indicate feeling uncomfortable with the message and the audience. Chapter 11. Speed reading peed reading is a technique to increase reading without compromising understanding and retention of information. There are several different methods of speed reading, but they all aim to read clearly, but faster. For those who work as a freelancer, especially the producers of web content, digital marketing, etc., reading is a prime activity. And speed reading lets you take even more of the time you have available for this activity. It is through reading that you deepen your knowledge to argue more strongly and keep your repertoire of subjects relevant and up to date. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to devote the time needed to complete reading an article. In this situation, speed reading helps you extract the most important information in less time. What Is Speed Reading? Speed reading is a technique that seeks to increase the reading speed without compromising understanding and retention of information. Check out this step by step guide and learn how to enhance your speed reading skills! 1. Train your eyes to make bigger jumps Do you know how the movement of your eyes works while reading? Basically, it's a jumping move. Your eyes pin one point on the line and then jump to the other. The higher this leap, the more proficient is your reading. Beginner readers, like children, skip only one word at a time and therefore take longer to finish each line. Therefore, the first step of speed reading is to train the eye movement so that it is wider. 2. Go straight ahead The second step is to control that anxiety, that sense of obligation to understand 100% of the text. We are going to take this up further but know that 80% understanding is an excellent goal. In other words, you do not have to return to the beginning of the page every time you do not understand a line. After all, re reading can take a long time and that is precisely what we are trying to avoid. In addition, you can fully understand the general idea of a text, even though some excerpts are more confusing. Then, after finishing the text, resume only the parts where you have doubts. But if you stop and go back constantly, you will never finish reading. Another important tip is to not interrupt the reading to check the dictionary. If you are very curious about the meaning of a word, write it down to check afterwards. However, do not abandon the text to browse the dictionary because when you return, it will take you even longer to resume reading. In the meantime, try to understand the term by context you may not absorb the exact meaning of the word, but it will be enough to understand the message the author wanted to convey. 3. Stop speaking the words The third step is to eliminate a negative practice that is a habit of many people: to pronounce the words as they read, either loudly or mentally. This habit prevents the development of speed reading because it means that you will literally read word for word. The speed slows down and as incredible as it may seem, the capacity for understanding as well. Because your brain will be busy with pronunciation, you will not be able to concentrate on interpreting what you are reading. The result is that you will have to reread the same stretch several times. If you are too accustomed to pronouncing as you read, losing this habit can be a difficult and time consuming process. An interesting tip is to put a pencil in your mouth as you read. With a little practice, you will lose this "craze" and see how it improves your reading time. 4. Use skimming technique The fourth step is "skimming." This is a well known technique for Instrumental English, but it is also useful for speed reading in any language. Skimming consists basically of looking quickly through a text in order to extract basic information index, title, author, date of publication, main subject, subtopics developed, graphics and images. This technique is useful for you to quickly evaluate any text and then set whether to devote more time to a full reading. If you are researching on a specific subject, for example, skimming will allow you to identify whether a particular article has relevant information about the subject. In addition, you will find the excerpts that interest you more easily. 5. Use the scanning technique The fifth step, "scanning," is another technique used in English Instrumental. It consists basically of looking at the text to identify keywords, which in this case are relevant terms, related to the information you want to extract from that content. Suppose you are reading a twenty page article on People Management, but the subject that really matters to you is Productivity. In that case, you do not have to read all twenty pages which will certainly tell you about various other issues that are not important to you right now. Instead, just look through the article for terms directly related to productivity, such as "time," "organization," "concentration," and so on. When you find one of these terms, you just need to read that passage. Thus, you quickly get information that is of interest to you and "skip" the rest. WOT 6. Monitor your performance Once you incorporate what you have learned in the first five steps, the evolution of your speed reading will depend on practice. But to see if it's working, you need to keep track of your progress. So, the sixth step is picking up a timer and monitoring how many words you read per minute. As a reference, keep in mind that a typical reader reads, on average, 150 words per minute. Meanwhile, a good speed reading practitioner can read up to 800 words per minute. But do not just monitor speed. Take into account, also, the use of reading, that is, how much you can understand the text without having to return to it a second time. Your goal should be an average of 80% utilization. Remember that there is no point in speeding up reading, and thereby lessening the understanding of what has been read, as the re reading also represents a waste of time. 7. Train Your Focusing Ability Now that we've covered the best strategies for speed reading itself, let's take a few tips that will enhance your reading experience as a whole and as a result, help you absorb more information in less time. The ability to stay focused while reading is critical to being productive and not wasting time. The deeper you "plunge" into the text, the better you understand what the author wrote. What happens, then, if you go to every two paragraphs to check the notifications on your cell phone? The experience will be interrupted and continually resumed, which diminishes your ability to comprehend and thus takes you to take more time to understand what is read. In this way, you waste twice as much time: the extra time it takes to understand what you read, and the precious minutes wasted with distractions (Smartphone, computer, social networks, etc.). If you often suffer from it, the key is to turn productivity into a habit. To do so, when you read, keep the distractions away. This means not leaving the phone nearby, not keeping the computer by your side and, if possible, turning off the internet or at least placing your devices in airplane mode. This time is for you to dedicate to the text and nothing else! The more you can focus on reading, the better your ability to practice speed reading. 8. Find a quiet place to do your reading The place you choose to do your readings also greatly influences the speed and dynamism of the activity something very connected to the danger represented by the distractions, as we just mentioned. Noise from traffic, from work, from an establishment (such as a bar, for example) and even from music can disturb your ability to concentrate, making you frequently "quit" reading. Also, if you are reading in an environment with other people, you will also be directly interrupted if they speak to you, even if it is a quick dialogue. Besides being silent, it is also important that the chosen corner for reading is comfortable. When you are comfortable reading, it is much easier to indulge in the text and devote your full attention to it. And if you have a special space where you like to read, another advantage is that this will make it easier to establish reading as an integral part of your routine. 9. Do not insist when you are tired You may have heard that it is not very productive for a student to spend the night studying for a test that will be given the following day. At that point, the desperation of a few extra hours of study is no longer as important as the rest, which will allow more focus and better memory for the student during the test. The same principle can be applied to speed reading. When we are tired, regardless of whether the exhaustion reaches our site and/or head, our ability to concentrate decreases dramatically. You will find yourself having to read and reread the same passage several times, and of course, it takes much longer to read each line. And the worst part is that the following day you can pick up the text and realize you cannot remember much of anything you read the night before. This is because a tired brain also decreases its ability to retain information. So, an important point of speed reading is to know the time to stop. 10. Read whenever you can What the reader does not like to sit in their favorite armchair and deliver hours and hours to a relevant and high quality text? However, as you well know, this is not always (or rather, almost never!) possible. Does this mean, then, that you are bound to a routine? Of course not! It turns out you do not have to self punch yourself for not being able to devote several hours of each day to reading. Start enjoying every free minute, especially with regards to idle time spent in queues, waiting rooms, or on public transportation, for example. And how about going a little early to bed, every night, and reading before bed? A block of fifteen or twenty minutes in which you would do nothing when dedicated to reading becomes time well spent. With this, you advance much faster in your readings, although you cannot read much each day. Another advantage is that this will help you build the daily habit of reading and, who knows, it will even encourage you to separate a few hours of your day into the activity. Do you already practice speed reading? What is your speed and reading achievement? If you have not yet reached the goals proposed here, do not worry. Reading is a habit you cannot be afraid to develop, and the benefits are gigantic. Keep in mind, however, that the tendency is to improve your vocabulary with constant reading. And with a complete vocabulary, you will have more and more facility to read and understand longer texts. Essential Tips You Should Know About Speed Reading Learn how to read more quickly by ensuring that all the content you learn is not lost in your mind after a few days. Answer quickly! Do you read fast or slow? Have you ever tried to calculate your reading speed? By chance, have you heard of dynamic reading? If not, you should. Well, if you love reading or even depending on it for studies, this advanced reading mode could help you a lot! Dynamic reading is a faster type of reading which makes you read a lot ina short time. You may be thinking reading fast is easy, but you cannot memorize it that way. Therefore, dynamic reading ensures this without impairing its ability to absorb content. We've prepared some essential tips for you to start increasing your reading speed. Understand: There are different types of reading speed. There are some reading differences that you may not know about and it is important to know. As we said, a more agile and concentrated reading reduces the time needed for learning. Therefore, it optimizes productivity and ensures that all content learned is not lost in your mind after a few days. And this is essential for students, contestants, or even law and medical market professionals who need to read constantly. But this is not restricted to a group of people. Dynamic reading can help someone who already has a habit of reading to make you a reader with an even greater repertoire. It must be understood that dynamic reading has two fundamental factors: content speed and retention. In short, reading too slowly can hinder the progress of any reading, or studies. Just like reading too fast and not understanding the subject is not good either. Therefore, it is essential to find a balance by reading at a fast speed that does not detract from the retention of information. Valuable tips for anyone who wants to start dynamic reading. e Start slowly. Read every 15 minutes free! e Subtract only minutes from your daily activities to read. e Read for 20 minutes while waiting for dinner to be ready in the oven. e Read while waiting for the bus to work and if possible, even within driving. With time and practice, dynamic reading will already be in your effortlessly! Chapter 12. Perfecting the Skill of Analyzing People Through the Practice ne of the best things you can do if you want to improve your ability to analyze people is to read more often. Think about the plot, each of the characters and other options of what could happen. This will stimulate your thinking. It also provides an excellent opportunity for you to check your logic skills. Furthermore, it will expand your imagination. These things will, in turn, increase your ability to analyze people. If you don't have time to read or the inclination but spend significant amounts of time driving every day, whether commuting or driving for work or for whatever reason, find some thought provoking podcasts to listen to. These can also stimulate your thinking. Most of them will offer useful tips on how to stimulate your creativity and challenging ideas and thoughts. This all works together to increase your mental capacity which you've guessed it increases your ability to analyze people. You may not believe this, but it has been shown that regular exercise of moderate intensity has been shown to be directly related to increased mental capacity. There are all different types of exercise that you can choose from, but if you choose something like tai chi that you have to learn and memorize moves as well as execute them fluidly, you may increase your mental capacity and your physical stamina as well. Playing brain games is a great way to increase your mental capacity as well as your analytical skills. You can turn off the tv and play a game with your family and track your progress over time. Perhaps your family is not interested in playing brain games, but no worry, there are many brain games out there that you can play by yourself. Expand your circle of acquaintances. There is nothing wrong with having a close group you generally associate with, but conversations will most likely follow similar paths. Socializing with people you don't normally interact with can offer you different ideas, perspectives, and stimulating conversation. If you're not sure where to begin, you can begin by attending a networking gathering and interact with each person there. You may be surprised at how much interacting with new people will stimulate your thinking and get new ideas flowing. Keeping a journal is a good way to improve your logical abilities as well. We tend to get caught up in things and it is easy to feel overwhelmed, but when you write things down it tends to remove the emotion from it and let you look at it in a logical way. It also makes it easier to look back on things and track your progress. An essential yet often overlooked task is to learn something new every day. It's not relevant so much what you learn as the fact that you need to learn new things every day. It can be a new recipe you try or a new hobby you develop. Often once schooling is finished and the day to day of work takes over many people forget all about learning. Learning new things keeps your mind active and just like any muscle the more it's exercised the better shape it will be in. If you do have time that you could devote to education, you might want to look at some online courses. The key is to pick something you have no experience in. After all, we want to learn new things not just improve on the skills we already have. There is a wide range of topics that are available in online courses now. It shouldn't be too hard to find something that you have no past experience in. If you're struggling in any area of your life, it is quite likely that you will be able to find an app to help you analyze your habits and pick out and correct any bad habits you have developed. The more well rounded you are as a person, the better able you will be to read someone else. Self improvement is acommonly overlooked method of improving any skill. Balance is key to success, so to be successful at learning to read people, you need to read yourself and find balance. Get curious about something. Curiosity inspires our motivation, which in turn inspires our creativity and intelligence. Curiosity causes us to question ourselves and those questions encourage us to consider alternate methods and possible outlets. This causes us to compare what we previously knew, or thought we knew, with what we have learned. This leads to logical solutions. So, when the curiosity bug bites you, embrace it and ask questions. After all the more you learn the better your analytical skills will become. Practice being observant. It is all too common nowadays for people to be engaged in rushing around trying to get things done as quickly as they can and not focusing so much on how well they can get them done. Take the time to slow down and focus on the details. Pay attention to your surroundings and see what is going on around you. Watching how somebody does something might spark an idea for you or give you insights as to how to solve an issue you were dealing with. A key element of improving your analytical skills is to challenge yourself to constantly learn more. If you're open while you do this, you will increase your ability to appreciate and comprehend different concepts. This will, in turn, assist in streamlining your process of finding solutions. Math problems are an excellent way of improving your analytical skills. They are structured in such a way that you are provided information and then forced to use that information to find the solution. The more complicated math problems you solve, the more your logic and reasoning skills will develop. This, in turn, means the more your analytical ability will increase. Some things you can do is identify math problems in everyday life, and then take the time to solve them. Or if you have the ability and access, you could enroll in a college level math course. Many of these courses will help you develop your analytical skills. Some of you may be pleased to know that there are a number of video games available now that help to improve analytical skills. The ones that focus on strategy and other games that require solving problems to achieve big goals. Debate clubs are excellent ways of increasing your analytical abilities. Your point of view and theories will constantly be challenged by people who are also trying to improve their own analytical abilities. Your analytical skills will develop with participation in almost any social group providing it promotes seeking knowledge and exchanging of ideas. There are a number of ways to improve your analytical ability, and these can be broken down into many more categories I'm sure, but one thing that can have a profound impact on your ability to analyze things, people or problems, is to expand your knowledge base. The more you have in your knowledge base, the more tools you will have to choose from when it comes to understanding and interpreting information. Also, there are many ways to increase your knowledge base. When it is recommended to read lots, it does not mean pick a topic or genre that you enjoy and read lots about it. The best method of improving your knowledge base is to read lots over a wide range of genres or topics. Subscribe to informative magazines, attend lectures or other academical talks. You could consider going back to college or taking other educational classes in your community. Learn to take the time to think about things. This applies to everything in your life, the more time you take to think about things before making decisions the more your analytical skills will improve. This doesn't mean to dawdle in making decisions, but the important part is to look at the situation from different perspectives and to visualize alternate scenarios. Don't immediately choose the easiest solution but think about it and consider all options and outcomes. Don't discard the easiest solution either though. It could prove to be the best one after all, but it is best to consider all options before making a decision. An excellent example of this would be a chess game. Before you make a move figure out what your opponent’s most likely response will be. Then continue to think about all the other options of responses he or she could make. In this way not only will your chess game improve, but your analytical abilities will increase as well. Expanding your world view is one of the best ways to improve your analytical abilities. While this may sound simple, it is not a quick fix and is not easily done. The results are fabulous though. Travel is a great way to expand your world view, but that is not always feasible in every situation. Other ways to expand your world views is to set aside your religious, political and cultural beliefs about truth. Think of different ways of viewing the world. Different perspectives to look at it from. Pick a position or idea you would normally dismiss immediately, and work to understand it. How would you defend this position to someone like you that would normally dismiss it without really even considering it? You can also go out of your way to meet people and interact with people who are very different from yourself, this will help you to learn to accept and learn to understand ideas that are different from what you would normally associate yourself with. Teach yourself to find the connections in things. Many things that we encounter on a daily basis are connected and those connections are most often overlooked. This can be exercised on a walk in the bush, what animals do you see? What connections do they have with other animals, seasons, pollution, the list is almost never ending? Learn to look at things in a cause and effect method. With your walk in the bush, and the animals you're seeing, what would happen to their water supply if there was a severe drought? Where would the repercussions of that stop, or would they? Think also about the similarities between things. Are all living things the same? Do spiders require any of the same things as humans do to survive? Historical connections are another area to look at. What cycles, patterns, and trends do you notice? What about the difference before and after the war? Paying attention to detail is extremely important. There is a saying that says the devil is in the details. If you don't know or don't understand the ins and outs of a problem, or all the details of something you're trying to find a solution for, you are a lot less likely to come up with a workable solution that will actually address the areas of concern. Another way of honing your analytical and observational skills that is extremely helpful is to contemplate the natural order of things. Instead of just accepting that things are the way they are, try to figure out why they are that way. This will give you a new and improved understanding of the world, and you will be motivated to think about complex issues. Keep questioning instead of just accepting the easy answer. The easy answer will come quickly, and many people stop there. Don't fall into this trap. Keep questioning until you get an answer that is more thorough and complete. Conclusion any of the so called great people would probably blush with shame if someone suddenly removed the immaterial veil that hides many of their shortcomings and vices from prying eyes ... These people, strong and great in public life, in private life are often weak and insignificant. Knowledge of the basic principles of psychology and analysis of human behavior, character traits and personality types can play an important role in the life of any person. In order for us to be able to most effectively fulfill our goals and effectively interact with people around us, we need to have at least an idea of what personality psychology, non verbal communication, methods of manipulation, and recognition of lies are. When we understand these issues, we gain the opportunity to make our lives more productive, comfortable, and harmonious. Surely, you have repeatedly thought about how great it would be to be able to read the thoughts of others. To some, intuition helps with this, but if you do not have such insight, there is only one thing left: to learn to understand body language. Aristotle wrote that “all the passions of the soul are connected to the body, since the body is subject to significant changes in the presence of passions." We often do not pay attention to our movements; meanwhile, they not only carry information that our mind perceives, but also are able to influence another person. The information on personality psychology in the context of analyzing people presented is designed specifically for you to be able to learn these important fundamentals and learn how to use them in practice as efficiently as possible. The ability to make predictions will help you predict the behavior of other people. Applying various patterns to yourself, whether it is to speak loudly (be sociable), be able to maintain eye contact, trying to understand the reaction of people around you, and knowing if people react negatively to their environment or conversation; you will become a real connoisseur of human souls and be able to acquire power over others. If you manage to learn to identify emotions, you can make assumptions that lead to such emotions. If you start to make forecasts and observe other people, then you can learn how to determine how the conversation is going. You’ll also be able to analyze the situation and ask yourself “What happened?” By analyzing other people, you will learn not only to read them well, but also to understand what causes emotions in people; you will be able to better attract attention, become a more interesting person, and become what you would like to become. We are not born charismatic or non charismatic, confident or unassertive this is just a set of your thoughts and actions. PART IT — Brainwashing Introduction rainwashing refers to erasing from one’s belief system the existing set of old beliefs and in its place supplanting a new set of beliefs. Brainwashing happens without someone’s will. While sometimes, brainwashing is subtle and involuntary, a lot of time it is violent. For example, we have had forced conversions during the crusade period and also during the jihad. In the forced conversion, the victims are fully aware that they are being brainwashed but accept it as a coping mechanism to avoid greater harm such as death. Violent brainwashing happens most in the militant cultic or criminal organizations where victims are trapped and have no exit option. Potential victims of violent brainwashing include: e Prisoners (especially prisoners of war) e Slaves under captivity e Kidnapped victims e Illegal aliens In the subtle brainwashing, often the victim voluntarily and unknowingly accepts brainwashing. In this case, the perpetrator looks out for susceptible victims who are more malleable. The victims are often in a desperate situation and thus have a psychological void that desires fulfillment. The following are some of the potential victims of unknowing brainwashing: e Those suffering from unknown chronic illness e Minors who have left their home to live alone and often faraway e Those who have lost their jobs and are in deep despair e Those who have lost their loved ones, especially through divorce or death Common steps in brainwashing The following are some of the common steps taken by brainwashers to brainwash their victims: 1. Isolation 2. Attack on self esteem 3. Subjugation 4. Testing 5. Love bombing [solation The brainwasher knows that a person’s family or close circle can easily notice what is happening and thus rescue the victim. As such, the first step they take is to isolate the victim from close family and friends. Some, like cultic leaders, can instill negativities about close family and friends. This brings division between the victim and loved ones and thus breeds psychological isolation. For example, a cultic leader can claim that your closest friend is a psychic vampire that drains your energy thus making you chronically ill and as such, you ought to keep off from that friend. Since you are sick and desperate, you are likely to follow this brainwashing tactic and thus find yourself isolated from the very person who could have saved you from brainwashing. Attack on self esteem It is only a victim who has self doubt, low self confidence, and on the overall suffers from low self esteem that can easily be brainwashed. As such, the brainwasher seeks to achieve this state in the victim by attacking the victim’s self esteem. Some of the ways by which the brainwasher attacks the victim’s self esteem include: Verbal and physical abuse — this often applied in violent brainwashing where the brainwasher uses abuse as a means of demeaning the victim so that the victim loses self worth. Sleep deprivation — a sleep deprived person is more likely to submit to psychological pressure since there is lack of full consciousness. It is much easier for a sleep deprived person to submit to brainwashing instructions just to have an opportunity to be left alone and sleep. Intimidation—Intimidation is one of the tactics employed by brainwashers to push someone into involuntary submission. For example, the threat of punishment is a form of intimidation. Embarrassment — this is used especially if the victim has some dark secret that he or she wouldn’t like to be revealed. For example, a brainwasher may resort to using tricks to obtain nude photos of a potential victim or trick such a victim into marital infidelity. Once the brainwasher acquires these materials, he/she starts subtly embarrassing the victim. In this subtle embarrassment, the brainwasher doesn’t reveal the materials to the public but uses generalized terms that insinuate immorality on the part of the victim. The victim knows where the cues are leading to and thus does everything possible to dissuade the brainwasher from revealing these embarrassing contents. Thus, the brainwasher attains an upper hand which he/she uses to brainwash the victim. For example, the victim could be forced into performing rituals that wear the victim’s self worth and self esteem thus becoming deeply captive to the brainwasher. Eventually, the victim may be infected by the Stockholm syndrome, where, instead of acting against the brainwasher, acts to protect the brainwasher — an act, which, subconsciously is more about protecting the “secrets” (embarrassing content). e Scarcity creation such as rationing of basic necessities and only released upon the victim’s obedient performance. Subjugation Brainwashers seek to bring the victim under their absolute control so that the victims become absolutely obedient. The following are some of the tactics used to achieve subjugation: e Extreme abuse e Us vs Them e Love bombing Extreme abuse The victim is passed through extreme abuse. Almost often emotional and psychological abuses are employed. Physical abuse is only employed in violent brainwashing. Physical abuse is not employed in the subtle brainwashing. Us vs Them The victim is coerced to make a choice between the brainwasher and the rest of the world. However, the victim is not granted an exit option. The victim is introduced to those who are already brainwashed and thus praise the brainwasher. In case the victim still thinks of “them” (the outside world) as an option, the victim continues to be subjected to extreme abuse until he or she comes the ultimate choice of belonging to “us”, that is, joining the rest of the brainwashed subjects. Testing Testing happens to establish whether the victim has ultimately made the “us’ choice and no longer desires to join “them”. It is also done to test the victim’s level of obedience. Sometimes, under secret control, the victim may be released to “them” (the rest of the world) on the condition that he or she should return on a certain date. The victim is then secretly monitored to see whether he/she desires to return to “us” (the brainwashed group). If the victim does not desire to return to “us”, then, the victim is kidnapped and returned to the fold upon which the vicious cycle begins. On the other hand, if the victim voluntarily returns to us, then, the victim is taken to the next stage, that is, love bombing. More often than not, due to isolation and induced dependency, even if the victim desires to rejoin “them”, the victim finds it such a long journey to recovery and hence prefers getting back to “us” rather than starting all over again to rebuild the lost life. Love bombing Once tests are done and prove that the victim has been effectively brainwashed, love bombing is applied to galvanize the victim into the fold. Love bombing could be in the form of praising, promotion in the order of subjects, receiving gifts, etc. Chapter 1 What is Brainwashing? f you ask someone if they know what brainwashing is, they will probably reply that they do. Brainwashing is a concept that many people have heard of, while mistaking their vague familiarity for accurate understanding. Before looking at how, where, and why brainwashing occurs, it is essential to understand exactly what brainwashing is and isn’t. Of all the dark psychology techniques contained in this book, brainwashing has the most serious and widest impact. If the other dark psychology techniques are sniper bullets, aimed at one particular person, brainwashing is a nuclear bomb capable of devastating an entire city. The term brainwashing refers to the slow process of replacing a person’s ideas about identity and belief with new ideas that are intended to suit the purpose of the person doing the brainwashing. Brainwashing can occur in both wider and narrower contexts. For example, a brainwasher is able to control one person in particular, or use the same techniques and principles to control the minds of a wider group at once. Brainwashing is the process that turns atheists into suicide bombers and prisoners of war into communists. It has been tried, tested, and proven over the years to be effective in almost any scenario. So, what are the most common misunderstandings related to brainwashing? Many people picture the process as some kind of quick and forced occurrence. Picture either Alex in “A Clockwork Orange” or Neo in “The Matrix” having concepts forced into their cranium, involuntarily, in a short space of time. This is Hollywood brainwashing and is far from what actually occurs in real life. The process of real world brainwashing will be explored in detail later in this chapter, but at its simplest, brainwashing is a process involving the slow, gradual, and seemingly voluntary changing of a person’s “map of reality” from the one they have freely put together to one that is forced upon them by the brainwasher. The evil irony of the technique is the brainwasher will ensure the victim feels in control at all times. Brainwashing Contexts So, what are some of the main situations that are fertile breeding grounds for brainwashers? Before the process of brainwashing itself is explored fully, let’s take a look at the situations in which people are often brainwashed and the motivations behind this. A lot of people would agree with the idea that “cults brainwash people” but few would be able to explain exactly what a cult is and how they brainwash their recruits. Let’s demystify the process. A cult is a fringe group, often built around a charismatic leader who is able to exert high levels of influence over their followers. The cult will usually provide a “complete understanding of reality” to those who follow it. Why exactly is this cult context one in which brainwashing flourishes? The primary attraction of cults is they present reality as something very simple and within reach of the average person, provided the person is willing to take on board the cult’s teachings. We live in a complex modern world where life can seem confusing and overwhelming. Cults cut through this confusion and tell people “don’t worry, we have the answer.” The way in which this “answer” is presented is intended to play on the human need for belonging and acceptance. Brainwashing can flourish in this context as a result of the idea of the “new normal.” What exactly is “the new normal”? It is a way in which cults are able to influence those they brainwash into accepting their teachings by making them seem prevalent, accepted and positive. For example, the idea of worshipping a man who claims to be God would be incredibly strange in everyday life. Within the closed environment of a cult, however, this behavior becomes “normal” to the extent that not doing it would seem strange to people within the cult! This process of persistent, social reinforcement is one of the most powerful ways in which the ideological brainwashing of cults is able to occur. Think of cults as drug dealers. Perhaps the newcomer to the cult had been seeking something in their life and came across the cult, just as newcomers to the world of drugs often, misguidedly, seek out their first high of their own volition. The cult doesn’t need to “push” the drug of their ideology onto the victim as the victim was already seeking the fulfillment of a void in their life. It is this initial “search” and “readiness” on the part of the people who are later brainwashed that makes them so susceptible to the brainwashing process itself. Ideologies are another context, similar to cults, in which brainwashing is commonplace. The difference between a cult and an ideology is the focus of the ideology is on the idea itself rather than the person delivering the message and those who follow them. Whereas cults brainwash people into placing faith and trust in the cult leader and their followers, ideological brainwashing involves leading people to place absolute trust in an idea. Ideological brainwashing is incredibly dangerous due to the fact it goes above and beyond any one individual. Think of extremist religious terrorism, for example. It is possible for a high profile figure within the ideology, such as Osama Bin Laden, to be killed. Does this kill support for the idea itself? No! The dead figures are praised as martyrs who gave their life to the ideology, thus increasing its attractiveness and allure to potential newcomers. Almost any ideology is likely to have an extremist, fringe outskirt in which brainwashing takes place. Even something seemingly innocent like a pop band can have this impact. Young fans, at a psychologically impressionable age, link their sense of identity, happiness, and belonging to a pop group. They will gladly defend this group to extents that are unusually intense. Some pop groups have fans that even self harm, using razor blades, if a member quits the group! If you carefully consider this phenomenon of the power of brainwashing even in accidental, innocent contexts, then consider how devastating the process can be in intended contexts like cults and terrorist groups. Now that you have a clear understanding of the way brainwashing can occur in broader social contexts, such as cults and ideologies, it is important to understand that a personal, one on one context is also a ripe situation for elements of brainwashing to occur in. There are similarities and differences between “group” and “individual” brainwashing and understanding these nuances can help to identify when either type is occurring. Personal brainwashing is similar to group brainwashing as it involves the slow and steady replacement of existing beliefs with new beliefs that serve the objectives of the brainwasher. Instead of relying on group dynamics to reinforce “the new normal,” a one on one brainwashing situation will instead rely on a deep, personal connection between the brainwasher and the victim. This can be even more powerful than group brainwashing as the content can be modified and altered to the particular psychological constitution of the victim The Process of Brainwashing Now that you understand the reality of what brainwashing is, and where it occurs, let’s take a look at the specific process itself. Distinctions will be drawn between the way in which the process applies to both group and individual situations. The starting point of any episode of brainwashing is the mental state and social circumstance of the victim. This is the foundation upon which the rest of the process is entirely reliant. Brainwashing is not something that can be carried out on absolutely anyone. It requires the identification of a person who is seeking something or trying to fill a void in their life. So, what kind of people are ideal victims for brainwashers? People who have had their existing reality shaken up by a recent event are prime targets for brainwashers. For example, many of the Western men who have travelled to become terrorists in Syria, and detonate suicide bombs, have done so after the death of a close friend or relative. When their existing world loses its meaning and certainty, brainwashers can step in and provide that certainty in the form of a murderous ideology. Once a brainwashing victim has been identified, either in person or via the Internet, the actual process of brainwashing begins. Contrary to the popular image of a brainwasher as a wide eyed psychopath who will incessantly and angrily indoctrinate their victim, real world brainwashers are anything but this. They will come across as calm, friendly, rational people who have their lives together in a way the victim does not. Imagine being homeless and being befriended by a celebrity. This is how the process of meeting their brainwasher for the first time feels for a victim. The brainwasher will often work initially on creating a level of trust and rapport between themselves and their victim. This usually involves creating both deep and superficial similarities. For example, superficial similarities may involve surface level preferences like an enjoyment of the same sport or even food! Deeper level rapport may involve some “deep” shared experience in the past of both the brainwasher and the victim. Brainwashers will convincingly fake these if needed. If the victim shares the fact that they have lost a relative in the past, guess what? The brainwasher suddenly has a similar story to tell. The false emotional warmth and connection explained above is not the only aspect of brainwashing that occurs initially. The brainwasher will often provide gifts and other favors to their victim. For example, the brainwasher may treat them to meals or send them gadgets or other useful items. This creates a sense of gratitude and indebtedness from the victim to their brainwasher and softens up any resistance the victim may initially experience. One of the most powerful examples of the above initial kindness can be taken from Prisoner of War camps. When American troops have been captured in the past, their captors often offer them American cigarettes and speak to them in a respectful way. This reverses the expectations of the victim and opens the victim’s mind to the further brainwashing process that is to follow. A utopian presentation is the next step in the brainwashing process, following the initial victim identification and rapport building stages. This involves the brainwasher slowly and increasingly offering a solution to all of the problems that the victim has opened up about. This is always done in a casual, offhand way at first to avoid any negative experiences of pressure the victim may experience otherwise. This utopian solution is always whatever cult, ideology or personality the brainwasher is trying to convert their victim to—terrorism, communism or just a charismatic brainwasher’s own need for validation and praise. When performed correctly, the initial stages of this process will leave a victim craving more and more information and understanding of the solution that is being hinted at. The brainwasher may even withhold this information initially, as if it is something that the victim must work at being worthy of attaining. This will lead to a strong motivation on behalf of the victim to seek out and accept the information they are eventually provided with. Thanks to the preceding steps, the poisonous ideas that are being implanted into the victim will seem as natural and refreshing as cold water on a hot day. Once the victim is being spoon fed snippets of their new belief system, and responding well to them, the brainwasher will be very careful to reveal the right things at the right time. This is a concept that is sometimes known as “milk before meat” or “gradual revelation.” It basically involves the presentation of easy to accept ideas before anything controversial is revealed. For example, in the case of religious terrorism, recruiters may initially focus on convincing their victim that God loves them. This is usually quite acceptable. More objectionable ideas, such as God wants you to blow yourself up, are saved until far further down the line. At this point, the brainwashing has reached the point of no return. You may be questioning way a victim continues to engage with their brainwasher once the objectionable ideas begin to become apparent. The reason is threefold. First, the already vulnerable victim now feels a strong sense of liking and approval of their brainwasher. Second, the victim has invested time and sometimes money into the process thus far. This is known as the “sunk cost fallacy.” The victim is loath to “throw away all their hard work” by walking away from the process. Finally, the brainwasher is likely to have amassed a lot of secretive and sensitive information on their victim. This “dirt” can then be held over the victim’s head, either discreetly or overtly. Both the ideas of a vulnerable victim and the “sunk cost fallacy” make logical sense. The idea of blackmail and control may be harder to understand at first. Why would a victim respond well to such threats? Well, they are rarely presented in a threatening way. For example, if the victim has divulged a lot of sensitive information to a brainwasher, and then begins to give signs of walking away, the brainwasher may appear concerned and insist that “if I can’t help you anymore with your problems, I need to make sure someone else can. Perhaps your family or boss need to know what’s been going on with you, so they can look out for you when I’m not there.” Because of the deep sense of rapport and warmth the brainwasher has manipulated their victim into feeling, the above form of blackmail and control is often actually perceived as kind, compassionate behavior. It is often enough to make the victim see “sense” and agree to remain on the brainwashing path they have embarked upon. Brainwashers are adept at making the pain and struggle of walking away seem epic, so staying becomes the preferable, easy option by default. The end product of this process is the victim believing everything they have been indoctrinated to view as the truth. The power of the process is that the victim will feel they have chosen these views as their own and have sought them out through their own volition. This leaves a previously normal individual as an indoctrinated psychological slave to something they have no idea even exists. The Impact of Brainwashing The above analysis of the brainwashing process shows the severity and depth of the technique. It is inevitable that a process as powerful as this has lasting consequences. Some of the main impacts of brainwashing after the process has been completed will now be explored. Loss of identity is one of the most serious side effects of brainwashing. A feature of many cults and ideologies is that people who complete their initiation process are given a new name. This allows the person’s psyche to totally detach from their old identity. They can believe things and do things they would never have done before as the person they used to be no longer exists. When carried out carefully the brainwashing process leaves a victim feeling as if their old identity was no more real or permanent than a nightmare from which they have awoken. So, is brainwashing simply a process of ideas? Not at all. If brainwashing resulted in only the change of opinions then it would be far less of a problem than it actually is. The main danger of brainwashing is it not only changes the ways that people think and feel but also the way they behave. People go from functional members of the society with acceptable, positive jobs and interests to brainwashed zombies willing to carry out rape, murder, and suicide. This sounds sensational and dramatic, but it’s true. Read on for the proof. If you have any doubts about what brainwashing can drive a person to, consider the following examples. Members of some religious cults will gladly cut off all contact from their family, leave their careers behind, surrender all their wealth and possessions, and place their autonomy entirely in the hands of the organization that has brainwashed them. This is not all. The victim will see their new lifestyle as a blessing they are fortunate to have, rather than something unpleasant they have been forced into. Another example of the toxic outcome of brainwashing is the repeated tale of young people becoming brainwashed by religious extremists to travel to a foreign land and drive a car packed full of explosives into a group of people they have never met and who have never hurt them. Such young victims are often educated people with a track record of success in life and a family history free of turmoil or abuse. These tragic losses of life are testament to the overwhelming, all conquering power of the brainwashing process. PTSD (post traumatic stress disorder) is another hallmark of those who manage to escape, or are rescued from, a situation of intense brainwashing. Brainwashing victims often show the same physical and psychological signs as war veterans who have witnessed their friends being blown apart next to them during combat. The severity of this traumatic aftermath shows that a brainwashing situation can harm a person as much as a world war. Perhaps the most shocking examples of the long term impact of brainwashing are the numerous instances of people who have been rescued or escaped from a brainwashing situation, only to later return of their own free will. Even once they are outside of the controlling, brainwashing environment, the legacy of the process runs so deep through a person’s mind, they seek to return to it. This is a form of Stockholm syndrome. The escapees will actually praise their brainwashers far into the future and defend, support, and justify the ideological stances they were indoctrinated with while captive. Chapter 2 The Power of Persuasion ersuasion is perhaps one of the most innocent ways to control the mind of someone else. In a sense, it qualifies as mind control because it is literally causing someone to shift how they are thinking in line with what the persuader thinks is right. When you are able to master the art of persuading others, you will be able to yield that power when it is necessary, in ways that can be beneficial to both you and those around you that you seek to persuade. Of the different forms of dark psychology, this one is the least insidious. It does not hide and does not attempt to force someone else into doing something. Instead, it is open and honest— advertising its purpose and seeking to encourage those around the individual to do something because they want to rather than out of coercion. The persuader wants everyone to agree with him or her, but not badly enough to force the point or coerce others. When attempting to persuade someone, there are six principles that should be remembered. Understanding and utilizing these can be incredibly useful when it comes to influencing other people. These six principles are reciprocity, consistency, social proof, likability, authority, and scarcity. Take the next several moments to familiarize yourself with each of these. Reciprocity This is perhaps the most basic of the principles of persuasion—in fact, it is so simple, you have already been introduced to this concept within this. Reciprocity is the concept of people wanting to give back when they receive. When you help someone, the other person is far more likely to help you. Reciprocity seeks to harness that concept, recognizing it as a truth of humanity, and seeing how useful it can be in encouraging others to do as a persuader desire. This can be seen even in restaurant settings—when the waiter or waitress brings you a few chocolates or a complimentary treat like a fortune cookie at the end of your meal with your check; you are far more likely to want to give a larger tip than if you had received nothing instead. This explains why so Many restaurants do offer up that cheap mint or cookie in response—they want to earn that extra tip. You can utilize this concept yourself by always making it a point to consider what you can do for other people before seeking the other person to do something for you instead. If you stop and ask what they can do for you, you are not likely to get as far as if you stop and ask what you can do for someone else first. Your mind will be blown the next time you try this. To start, try doing this in a relatively low stakes environment. Perhaps ask your spouse how you can help one evening, and after the fact, ask your spouse for a favor. Your spouse, if the favor is reasonable, is likely to concede! Consistency Consistency is a bit trickier to understand. It is the idea that people make active commitments to the world around them, and they feel obligated to follow through with it. When you have a commitment, you feel the drive to follow through, simply because you want to be considered reliable and committed. While this may not necessarily seem relevant to persuasion, consider this point: If you can get someone to offer a commitment to something, you are more likely to get them to follow through after the fact. People are innately driven to complete whatever they have promised to do so. If you want someone to do something for you, then, you should always seek to get it put into a commitment of sorts in order to ensure it is completed. With the commitment made, you should then make it known to those around you. Through publicizing the individual’s commitment, such as by telling people at work that John over there has agreed to help you with your copying all week, you add an extra layer of pressure to the individual. John is far more likely to try to follow through simply because he wants others to see him as reliable as well. When there are multiple people’s thoughts about him on the line, he is far more inclined to push through and complete whatever he has agreed to do so. Keep in mind, however, that this has to be voluntary. The other person has to want to do whatever it is you are asking them, or they are not going to really feel compelled to follow through with finishing the task. For example, if you attempt to coerce the other person into doing your copying, and they reluctantly agree just to get you off their back, they are not going to feel that same innate drive to finish the work as if they had volunteered to do so on their own. Social Proof When is the last time you have walked into a room, looked around, and been entirely unsure what you were supposed to be doing? If you are not sure, think about the last time you went to a busy public building for the first time—you may have been entirely confused as to what you would be expected to do or where you should wait. Instead of standing there without doing anything, you likely looked to the cues of those around you—you appealed to social proof. You wanted to fit in, and so you chose to do what those around you were doing, even though you were still unsure that that was the right thing to do. People oftentimes rely on the social cues from those around them to understand what they should be doing, thinking, or feeling. Specifically, people want to follow their peers rather than authorities or subordinates. Understanding this concept can be incredibly important when it comes to persuasion—if you are going to be getting a new group of charges at work, the easiest way to get everyone in line is to get a single person on board first and allowing everyone else to follow that one particular person’s example. You just lessened your own workload and allowed for those around you to be trained quickly and easily. Likability Ultimately, people are far more likely to be persuaded when they like the person who is attempting to persuade them. It is a simple fact of life— people naturally reach out to those they know and trust and are more likely to take the advice of someone they trust than someone they do not. This can be used in a wide range of ways, and even if the other person is entirely new to you or does not know you well enough to like you, there are ways you can persuade them to like you so you can then persuade them at a later time. There are three things that cause people to be more likely to like someone. These are relatability, praising, and being able to cooperate toward a common goal. If you can harness these, you are far more likely to get someone else to like you. When you are relatable, people are likely to get along better with you. When you can relate to someone, you are better able to empathize, which can allow them to better see that they do like you. The easiest way to make yourself relatable in situations in which you are, for example, a salesperson, is to share a small detail about yourself early on or decorate your room or office with pictures or items that are relevant to you. Maybe you have pictures of your children up, or perhaps you decide to add a photo of yourself engaging in a hobby. Anything goes, so long as it personalizes you. Secondly, when you want to be likable, you should always make it a point to praise the other person. However, you cannot just make something up or say something that you do not mean—you need to make genuine compliments to the other person. When you lie about praise, you are often seen as doing so manipulatively and, in an attempt, to convince them to want to help out of sheer flattery. Even though you may actually be complimenting them more to get them to agree than out of kindness, you should still make sure that whatever you do say is genuine. Lastly, you want to make sure you and the other person are working toward the same goal. When you are both working together toward a common goal, the other person is going to be far more likely to want to work with you. Even in situations where you stand to benefit far more than the other person, such as in a Sales job when you are trying to sell a car, and you will literally make a commission based off of the cost of the car bought, you should make it clear that you are working toward a common goal. You can do this by pointing out that you want to help the other person, or through phrases such as, “help me help you” that make the other person feel like you are on their side. After all, you are—you want them to get what they want, while also wanting what they want to be mutually beneficial. Authority People naturally want to defer to authorities when it comes to certain situations and decision making. This is why people will go get consultations from lawyers or doctors, or they will go to a professional to help with taxes. When someone else is seen to have all of the pertinent information on something simply due to experience or education, it becomes far easier to just defer to whatever that person is thinking or suggesting. By recognizing the authority vested in someone else out of experience and education, people are able to avoid making the wrong decision due to a lack of experience or not knowing how something works. After all, would you want a daycare teacher to decide which surgery you should get to repair an issue? Unless that daycare teacher happened to also be certified as a surgeon, the answer is likely no. This is incredibly relevant to persuasion—if you can establish yourself as an authority on a topic somehow, people around you will be far more willing and happier to go along with whatever it is that you are requesting of them, which will serve you well. Luckily, there are several ways you can establish authority simply and quickly. The simplest way to do so is through making sure you keep your credentials visible. Place them on your nameplate, or hang your diploma on the wall right behind your desk. You could also make sure that when your clients come in, your secretaries offer some sort of detail that appeals to your authority. If you sell cars, your secretary may say something about how you are the top seller of the month, or if you are a dentist, the receptionist might sing your praises to the person making the appointment. You could also do this yourself by offering small snippets of details about yourself when the client first enters your office, such as making a comment about that one time you were in school at such and such prestigious university studying your major. By dropping your credentials subtly and naturally, you set yourself apart as an authority, and you will gain all of the persuasive power and influence with it. Scarcity The last of the principles of persuasion is scarcity. This one is also quite simple—it is literally supply and demand. When things are less readily available, people see them as more valuable, and when they are more readily available, they are seen as less valuable simply due to the ease of access. You can introduce scarcity in several different ways depending on the context. Within a relationship, you may put a time limit on making a serious decision, such as choosing to move in together or give an answer to a proposal. If you are attempting to sell someone something, you can make it clear that the offer that is on the table at that particular moment is limited and will expire shortly. This puts the pressure on the other person to decide quickly. While putting the limitations on the table, you should also make it a point to show how the other person is likely to lose out if they do not take the offer quickly. By focusing on what will be lost, the other person is more likely to act quickly simply because people do not like the idea of losing out. Another way to cause scarcity is to make something limited. Think of how restaurants will run limited time only items, such as fancy drinks or menu items. These are only available for a short period of time, and people often fall for the trick, trying to get in to get the limited time item just so they can say that they have. Especially today, with social media being so influential and people wanting to have everything social media ready, people are more likely to go out of their way to seek out a rare item just so they can say that they did so. Focus and don't leave yourself alone convinced because you were affected by at least one of these standards. Chapter 3 Steps in Brainwashing espite the fact that the art of brainwashing is so incredibly insidious, if you are able to take advantage of this process, you will find that it is far easier than it seems. It does not take much to entirely break down a person’s mind, so long as you have no qualms about utterly decimating the personality of someone else. If you are not afraid of destroying someone else, you will find that with just a handful of steps, that person can be destroyed and brainwashed. Of course, that does not mean that it is a quick process—it does take a significant amount of time to truly dismantle the mind of someone else. You will need to have the time, space, and blatant disregard for the law and other human life to take advantage of this technique. Assault on identity ' Channeling and releasing guilt Leniency Progress and harmony Final confession Self betrayal Breaking point Rebirth Assault on Identity Brainwashing is impossible if the individual that is being brainwashed is not willing to let go of who they are as a person. This means that the first stage of brainwashing is convincing them that they should not like the person that they are. In particular, you will spend time assaulting their identity in hopes of convincing them that their identity is problematic in some way. Effectively, you want to make them fear who they are and everything they value. For example, you may ask someone what their name is. If they answer with their name, you punish them severely and tell them that their name is something else. For example, imagine that the person’s name is Bill. He tells you that, and in response, you brutally beat him across the back with a board and then tell him that his name is Larry now. Every time that you ask him about his past, his identity, or anything else close to him and he answer truthfully, you would then beat him in order to make him fear the truth. You are effectively teaching him to fear the act of being honest with other people about who he is and because he does fear it, he is not likely to continue to repeat the mistake over and over. Guilt Next, it is time to instill guilt. As the other person is constantly being penalized for who they are, they effectively must be convinced that the abuse is their own fault. Maybe it was a fault of their culture or their family, or it was simply them as a person. You want them to effectively feel like they are responsible for their beatings and imprisonment, and you will get this through repetition. You will add more onto their plate as well—you may blame them for the fact that it is not sunny that day, or that something unrelated to him has happened. You want to lay on as much guilt as possible so the individual rejects themselves in favor of being able to reject the guilt. Self Betrayal Soon, the guilt will build up, as will the fear of torture if they continue to stand by who they are, and the individuals being brainwashed will find that it is easier to simply betray their identities than it is to stay true to themselves. They decide that they would rather break away from who they are as people in order to protect their lives, as they have reached a point of knowing that death will arrive if they are not careful. They would rather betray themselves, satisfying the fact that they need to survive, and they obey and submit. Breaking Point Upon denouncement of who they were as a person, the people being brainwashed find that they have hit their breaking point—they feel like they have lost all hope. They have accepted their new life and know that fighting back is futile. This is the beginning of the adoption of the new life that has been presented to them, as at that point, to the one being brainwashed, the choices are to assimilate or die, and they have already rejected who they once were. They officially give up at this stage and recognize that they will have no choice but to accept the new thoughts or cultures if they wish to survive. Leniency Next comes a ray of hope—someone that has been torturing the person being brainwashed to the brink of death, when he feels like he cannot possibly cope any longer, offers some sort of leniency. It may be a bit extra food, or a cigarette, or even just a kind word. It is then that hope is dangled in front of the individual and is seen as a legitimate option. The individual will latch onto that trust, seeing it as proof that they can, in fact, survive, if they play their cards right, and they latch onto that. The manipulator has officially won the trust of the one being brainwashed, and they begin to accept that all of the pain of torture will go away as soon as they are willing to give in and comply entirely. Compulsion to Confess At this point, the guilt becomes too unbearable for the individual—he feels like he cannot hold it in any longer and he feels that the only option is confession. He is driven to let go of that previous life and let’s go of it all. The manipulator, of course, encourages this, and soon, confessions are flying for anything possible. Even things that are not the fault of the brainwashed are confessed for in order to let go of all of that guilt. Progress and Harmony After that initial confession, the individual is slowly taught and assimilated. This stage is the education of the new identity and culture. People are encouraged to let go of the past. They agree to go along with what they are being taught out of fear of being returned to the past, in which they are treated poorly. Instead, they are given many basic human decencies to encourage them to continue to make their positive progress in their life. Final Confession Eventually comes the final confession—this is the stage at which they finally give up who they are for real. They are willing to renounce it all, seeing the beauty in what they have been taught and finding that they identify with the culture that has taken them in. They are willing to continue to coexist in this new social bubble and are willing to get in as soon as possible. Rebirth Finally comes the rebirth—at this stage, the prisoners are released. They are no longer being manipulated, simply because they already have been. Instead, they are indoctrinated and welcomed into the new society. While they are usually eager to get involved with the new life and the new people, they may be met with hesitation as people still see them as betrayers and foreigners. There is no amount of naming and ceremony, after all, that would allow the general population in that new circle to accept that they are the new person. Despite all of the effort that went into brainwashing, the general public still wishes to keep their distance, leaving the brainwashed remaining just as isolated as before. Chapter 4 Hypnosis ypnosis has been stepping the line among quackery and treatment since around the eighteenth century, yet as of late, it has been getting steam as an elective treatment for some issue. What is entrancing, does it work, and assuming this is the case, how? We research. The expression "hypnosis" is gotten from the Ancient Greek word for "rest" ("hypnosis"). Research recommends it was first instituted in the mid nineteenth century by Etienne Félix d'Henin de Cuvillers Trusted Source; a Frenchman keen on the job of recommendation on the psyche, and the psychological and conduct forms that occurred when somebody fell into a hypnotic trance. Other sources propose that it was Scottish specialist Dr. James Braid who begat the term. However, the idea of the mesmerizing daze was brought into the world before, in the eighteenth century, with the famous German physician Franz Mesmer Trusted Source. Mesmer guaranteed that he could feature the presence of something he called "animal magnetism," which is an undetectable liquid that "streams" between individuals, creatures, plants, and things, and which can be controlled to impact individuals' behavior. Mesmer's trick practices gave hypnosis an awful start. However, enthusiasm for its latent capacity persevered in the medicinal circle. In the twentieth and 21st hundreds of years, entrancing kept on being investigated, and pros have increased a superior comprehension of what it is and how it can now and again be harnessed to bring medical advantages. What do we know about hypnosis? An ongoing review Trusted Source distributed in the diary Neuroscience and Bio behavioral Reviews had characterized hypnosis as a sort of top down guideline of conscious awareness, a procedure where "mental portrayals [...] override physiology, perception, and behavior." Hypnosis has been stepping the line among quackery and treatment since around the eighteenth century, yet as of late, it has been getting steam as an elective treatment for some issue. What is entrancing, does it work, and assuming this is the case, how? We examine. Offer on Pinterest hypnosis genuine? Assuming this is the case, what does it do? Since the eighteenth century, trance has been encompassed by an atmosphere of a secret. As the creators clarify, spellbinding includes two principle components: induction and proposals. Sleep inducing acceptance is the primary proposal conveyed during the procedure of hypnosis; however, what it should comprise of is as yet a matter of discussion. Proposals are normally communicated as suggestions that evoke involuntary Trusted Source reactions from the members, who don't accept they have a lot, or any, control (or office) over the circumstance. A few people are also progressively "suggestible" than others, and analysts have discovered that highly suggestible Trusted Source individuals are likelier to have a decreased feeling of the organization while under hypnosis. Hypnotic inducing suggestibility has been characterized as "the capacity to encounter recommended changes in physiology, sensations, feelings, thoughts, or behavior." Neuroimaging procedures have demonstrated that highly suggestible individuals display higher movement levels Trusted Source in the prefrontal cortex, front cingulate cortex, and parietal systems of the mind during various periods of trance. These are territories of the mind engaged with a scope of complex Capacities, including memory and perception rested Source, handling feelings, and task learning. However, the particular mind instruments engaged with hypnosis are as yet hazy. However, researchers are starting to sort out the neurocognitive profile of this procedure. Hypnosis and Cognition Numerous investigations interface trance explicitly to subjective procedures and depict it as "a wonder including mindful responsive fixation." Some proof focuses on the job of entrancing in controlling specific considerations. The connection between entrancing and conditions of consideration is reinforced by the consequences of past investigations, in which a hypnotic proposal was utilized to modify various types of recognition. For example, the recommendation has been utilized to induce agnosia, which is a state wherein the mind can see yet can't perceive different outside boosts. Different tests have utilized proposals to control visuospatial processing trusted Source, which is the capacity of the mind to distinguish questions in space and to perceive shapes. Such impacts have frequently made entrancing a showbiz fascination, and, when treated as a performer's stunt, it evokes giggling and excited gasps. However, the act of mesmerizing has every so often pulled in an alternate sort of consideration, when the tricks of beginner "hypnotists" have seemed to have sad results. Another loaded utilization of entrancing is that of hypnotic regression. "Therapeutic regression,” which is a strategy that professes to reveal an individual's quelled recollections regularly of early abuse and trauma has, in some cases, been utilized in hypnoanalysis, which is a type of analysis coordinating hypnosis methods. Some even guarantee that entrancing can accomplish previous existence relapse, uncovering memories from past lives. Existing examination recommends that hypnotic suggestion can be viable in instigating bogus memories and persuading people regarding the honesty of these invented memories. Such discoveries illuminate cases of past relapse and on the memories therefore recaptured. However, there is additionally studies Trusted Source that gets proof support of the case that hypnosis can improve memory, yet the degree of progress might be subject to singular desires. Uses of Hypnotherapy The potential held by mesmerizing for changing observation is also what makes it especially fitting as an integral drug approach. Hypnotherapy is right now utilized, both in the United States and in Europe, to mitigate a few ailments and to assist individuals let go of negative propensities that can seriously affect their health. A few cases where hypnotherapy has been discovered valuable include: Irritable entrails syndrome Trusted Source (IBS). Studies have recommended that entrancing can soothe IBS symptoms for the time being. However, long haul adequacy has not yet been definitively tried. Insomnia and rest issues. Hypnosis can oversee a sleeping disorder, bad dreams, and rest dread (which will, in general, influence kids between the ages of 7 and 12), just as some increasingly strange rest issues, for example, sleepwalking. Relaxation and self control recommendations are utilized to address these conditions. Migraine. Some exploration recommends that trance can be powerful in treating headaches and pressure migraines, and it may be a desirable elective treatment because of the absence of reactions. Clinical pain control. Trance can have pain relieving impacts on account of intense clinical pain, which generally implies torment coming about because of surgeries. A few investigations additionally demonstrate that entrancing may assist ladies with managing labor torment, however, supporting proof is mixed. Quitting smoking Trusted Source. The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health detail thinks about recommending that hypnotherapy may help individuals who need to quit any pretense of smoking, particularly whenever combined with different methods for treatment. However, for this situation, as well, supporting proof is mixed. Home Uses of Hypnotherapy Strategies Progressively, self hypnosis and procedures of the sleep inducing proposals have gotten steam as "life hacks." Hypnotherapists and news sources regularly show self trance methods as an easy route for accomplishing relaxation and boosting self assurance. Analysts recommend that for these simple methods to be powerful, significant levels of suggestibility are pointless, and here and there, they advise placing them into training as a method for enhancing expert treatments at home. Some astounding roads wherein hypnotic proposal has been utilized are kids' books. One book, brought about by an author with broad information on brain research, utilizes recommendation systems to get small kids to nod off without the additional whine. What Raz's examination shows is that routine examples impact our recognition. His subjects expected to peruse nonsense words, and in this way, the area of the mind that would have typically perceived the word BLUE didn't activate. That thought structures one fundamental explanation of how hypnosis functions so successfully. Our brains have highly implanted ongoing designing. And, these idea designs are created over lifetimes. Memories, suppositions, negative experiences, positive experiences they all assistance to shape and fortify these examples and beliefs. As such, what we hear, feel, see, and accept to be valid, isn't constantly right. Rather, our conscious thoughts, what we believe is valid, are shaped by persistently advancing mind organizes that translate tactile information. This is called top down preparing. In top down handling, the data spilling out of the top abrogates and informs lower level procedures. Here's a model: Say you see a red vehicle. Outwardly, your eye catches tactile information about the vehicle. This information is sent to higher mind handling levels, where the shape and shading are deciphered. At that point, this data goes to more advanced levels where the shading and shape assist us with recognizing the vehicle's make and model. The information streams up, and yet around multiple times, the measure of criticism streams down. This top down criticism, which is dictated by our oblivious thoughts, advises the cerebrum on how to decipher sensory information. And, this clarifies why hypnosis works. By superseding the top down procedures with new, increasingly supportive recommendations, subjects can see the world through new eyes. Take a look at the Stroop Effect. It's hard to state "red" when taking a look at the word BLUE because our brains naturally read the word blue before, we encode the shade of the ink. However, when we see the words to be babble, we're ready to sidestep the basic and answer the inquiry immediately. That is the way to defeating bad habits and accomplishing personal growth. We should get down to the main driver, our negative suppositions that are keeping the bad habit set up and override them with better, increasingly supportive data. In this way, you can conquer your mind's educated top down procedures; for example, at the point when you feel pressure, you hunger for sugar and supplant this intuition with an increasingly supportive reaction. Reframing Our Preconditioned Beliefs through Hypnosis Here's an incredible case of the intensity of our preconditioned convictions. A gathering of members was approached to take a wine trail. They were given two decisions: A glass of "costly" wine and another of reasonably evaluated wine. The reality of the situation was: Both glasses were a similar wine. Yet, members anticipated that the costly wine should taste better, and in this manner, they gave it a lot higher marks for taste. The recommendation was subtle — one was increasingly costly — yet it plainly shows how effectively a proposal is utilized to develop our observation. Shockingly, the basic personality isn't as responsive to the proposal. You hear a recommendation, and then you analyze and critique it. However, with hypnosis, we enable the psyche to more readily acknowledge proposals? In the profoundly loosened up condition of hypnosis, our psyches are increasingly helpless to proposal. We're ready to reframe our reasoning examples on account of two standards: Suggestion and disassociation. e Disassociation: While in a condition of hypnosis, the hypothesis is that the mind parts into two states, the hypnotized mind, and a hidden spectator. As it were, we can shut out our environment and sidestep existing top down reasoning (the concealed spectator). This engages us to make recommendations without addressing if the proposal coordinates our current musings. Furthermore, late cerebrum imaging research proposes that hypnosis can make mind associations that make this conceivable. e Suggestion: During entrancing, the hypnotized individual is coordinated to concentrate on a single thought or recommendation. Also, since you've arrived at the hypnosis work, you can sidestep your basic contemplations concerning the recommendations. That is one hypothesis of how hypnosis works; we arrive at a state wherein the psyche can take proposals without addressing them. Take a look at Dr. Raz's trial: The hypnosis subjects read exceptionally conspicuous words — BLUE, GREEN, and so on — as rubbish. That happened because the mind was allowed to follow up on the proposal without addressing why. At last, most of the time, tangible information coordinates our top down handling. We see a red vehicle, and our memories reveal to us how to translate and decipher what the vehicle is. Through hypnosis, we use the recommendation to prepare the brain to react in an unexpected way to make another reality, wherein, more beneficial, progressively accommodating reactions are activated by tangible information. Consequently, when you experience pressure, your current top down considerations may encourage you to go after a cigarette, or gorge on sugary nourishments, or remain conscious around evening time — trance enables us to refresh and reframe these top down reactions. Different connections among hypnosis and reflection methods are additionally drawn by certain scientists. Certain studies Trusted Source recommends that contemplation and hypnosis are firmly related, as the two of them assume a job as a top priority body guideline. However, different specialists guarantee that hypnosis and mediations are independent procedures, as they depend on particular instruments. Hypnosis, they argue, is a procedure through which subjects "stunt" their very own perception, though mediation is a method for upgrading, as opposed to deceiving, awareness. Moreover, the way that the act of hypnosis has been around for over 200 years, a large number of its components stay strange. Its impacts may seem to verge on the extraordinary, yet the brain, as is frequently the situation holds the key. There may, at present, be some best approach; however, until we completely understand this captivating instrument called "hypnosis." Chapter 5 The Difference Between Persuasion and Manipulation any people fail to recognize the nuances between manipulation and persuasion. Despite the fact that both seek to convince someone else to do something else, they are quite different in enough key ways to be classified completely differently. One is only beneficial to the manipulator (manipulation) while the other ideally, should benefit both people. Because of these key differences, manipulation becomes far more insidious than persuasion. The manipulator sees the other person as a tool, a means to an end, whereas the persuader sees the other person as a partner. Defining Persuasion Though persuasion involves changing the mind of someone else, it is not necessarily a bad thing—there are plenty of ways that persuasion can be used innocently or benevolently. Persuasion is any method that will actively change the thoughts, emotions, actions, or attitudes of another person toward another person or thing. This change is seen as a persuasion. It can be done inwardly toward oneself through changing one’s own attitudes, or it can be done to other people as well. Usually, persuasion is used as a form of influence—it is everywhere. It is present in ads, politics, schools, professions, and just about everywhere you could think of. If you can think of something, chances are there is some sort of persuasive layer to it somewhere and somehow. When persuading someone, there are four key elements that must be present. These four elements are: e Someone who is doing the persuading e The message or the persuasion e A target recipient for the persuasion e A context that the persuasion is received Each of these four key elements must be present for something to be considered persuasive. Of course, this means that manipulation would fall within the category of persuasion as well. Defining Manipulation In psychology, manipulation is a type of influence or persuasion, but unlike regular persuasion, manipulation is covert, deceptive, or underhanded. This means that, unlike regular persuasion, which seeks to be most honest, manipulation is often untrustworthy. The manipulator will have no qualms about lying about the situation or attempting to coerce the target into believing something, so long as he gets what he wants. The manipulator seeks only to further serve himself—he does not care about the target and does not care about hurting the target. The target is seen as little more than collateral damage—a necessary sacrifice to get the desired results. As such, manipulation tactics are oftentimes quite exploitative and are almost always meant to be insidious and harmful. Successful manipulation requires three key concepts to happen. These three are: e Concealing the intentions and behaviors while remaining friendly upfront e Understanding the ways, the victim or target is vulnerable and using those vulnerabilities to the advantage of the manipulator e Being ruthless enough to not care about the harm caused to the victim Manipulation can take several different forms, but most of them follow the pattern of being covert, harmful, and causing no guilt to the manipulator. Key Differences Ultimately, persuasion and manipulation are quite similar: They are both forms of social influence, but that is where the similarities end. While persuasion is generally positive, even within dark psychology, manipulation is not. Manipulation is harmful, ruthless, and insidious in every way, shape, and form. When you are trying to decide whether something is manipulative or persuasive, there are a few questions you can ask yourself to decide. This simple test can allow you to analyze what you are doing and saying to ensure that you are making the choices that work best for you. If you are not looking to manipulate, but the questions tell you that you are erring on the side of manipulation, you know to tone it down a bit, lightening up on the manipulative factors. These questions are: e What is the intention that has led you to feel the need to convince the other person of something? e Are you being truthful about your intention and the process? e How does this benefit the other person? The persuader is going to be attempting to convince the other person from a good place—they intend to help the other person somehow. While they may benefit too, they are primarily looking out for the other person’s best interest. For example, you may try to convince someone to buy a specific car because it will work better for their family than the car that the person is currently looking at. This would be seen as persuasion—you are offering facts about the other car and showing how it would likely serve the person longer and better. On the other hand, the manipulator is not concerned with the needs of the other person—the manipulator is going to attempt to push for whatever benefits him or her the most. There is no good intention and there will likely not be much truth either. It is also not likely to benefit the other person much or at all, and may even be detrimental to the other person. For example, the manipulator may try to sell a car that is no good for the buyer simply because the other car may be worth more money and therefore net a much higher commission. The car is not likely to be very good for what the buyer needs, but that is not the manipulator’s concern. The manipulator would see that as something the buyer should know on his own and not bother pointing out the ways that the buyer may be making a bad decision, even if the manipulator knows the decision was wrong. Chapter 6 Ethical Persuasion ith persuasion and manipulation so closely related and really only differentiated in a few key ways, you may be wondering how to keep your own persuasion ethical. You may even be wondering why anyone would want to persuade, even ethically. There is a simple reason for this: Persuading others can oftentimes be quite beneficial to the other person, especially when you do so in order to better the other. Think of the best leader you may have ever encountered in your life. Perhaps it was a teacher that just had a way about him that always swayed people to behave. His very presence was enough to keep even the most troublesome students in line, even though those students rarely wanted to actually be in class. He could genuinely keep people involved in class and appeal to everyone, keeping even the students who would largely avoid actually learning in school engaged. He was able to do this through the persuasion of his own. Does this make the teacher a bad person? Not at all —he simply knew how best to deliver his messages to his targets, and in doing so, he was able to persuade those around him to pay attention. Ethical persuasion can be used in a wide range of situations. It can be used with your own children to keep them behaving well. It can be used at work to defuse stressful situations. It can be used to come to some sort of agreement with a spouse or friend. There are endless possibilities for ethical persuasion if you are willing to give it a chance. Defining Ethics Now for the boring part—Ethics. Many people hear the word and feel their brain instantly shut off simply due to the connection to philosophy. However, ethics are important in every context, even if you do not intend to use any of the skills you will be presented within this. Ethics, as simply put as possible, are the moral principles that guide everything we do. They are meant to govern the individual’s behaviors, ensuring that they are behaving in ways that are beneficial and respectful to those around them. Think of the golden rule you may have learned way back in kindergarten—treat others the way you want to be treated. That is ethics at its simplest. Importance of Ethics Despite how boring ethics may be, there is no way to deny that they are important. Think of doctors and lawyers—they have strict codes of ethics that must be followed in order to make sure that proper client professional relationships are formed. While you may not be a doctor or a lawyer, you should still be striving to live an ethical life simply to feel as though you have not wronged anyone. When you are able to manage ethics, you are able to make sure that those around you have their basic needs met. By behaving ethically, you are ensuring that you are respecting those around you, while also fostering credibility between yourself and others. When you remain ethical, you are able to better your own relationships with other people. They will see you as a valuable ally and asset—someone who is always mindful of everyone else and not stepping on toes. This is perfect when developing personal relationships as well as developing professional relationships at work. Ethics can also aid in decision making—since they dictate a specific standard that should be followed, people are able to more quickly create snap decisions that will be responsible and capable of ensuring that others are cared for. Overall, when maintaining an ethical point of view, you are able to remain professional and reliable. Remaining Ethical While it may seem difficult to juggle ethics when attempting to persuade someone else of something, there is a helpful anagram to help you: TARES. This stands for truthfulness, authenticity, respect, equity, and social responsibility. When you keep this in mind while attempting to persuade those around you, you will be better able to keep your own behavior in check. Remember, persuasion, in the right context, can be beneficial to everyone involved. It does not have to be avoided simply because it falls within the same category of social influences as manipulation. If done properly, persuasion is a powerful tool that will enable you to continue to act in an ethical manner while still persuading someone else to do what you see is right. Truthfulness When you are testing your persuasion and intent, start first with analyzing the truthfulness of what you are saying. You want to remain truthful and honest when attempting to persuade those around you for good reason— you want the other person to be informed. When remaining ethical, you should recognize the other person as being their own person with their own free will that deserves its own respect, just as you would want for yourself. You would not want someone else infringing upon your own free will, and as such, you should make it a point not to infringe on the free will of others either. When testing for truthfulness, ask yourself if what you have said is true. Beyond that, though, you must ask yourself if you have omitted any information that you felt would negatively influence the person or keep the person away from acting in the way you would prefer him or her to do so. You must make sure that you are truthful in your communication as well as in your lack of communication—make sure you leave no pertinent information out, regardless of whether the other person has asked about it or not. You want to make sure that the other person is as informed as possible because you want the other person to willingly agree to do what you are asking without coercion and without manipulation. Authenticity The next test for ethical persuasion is determining the authenticity of what is being presented. At a glance, this may seem similar to verifying truthfulness, but it goes a little further. In truthfulness, the important part was making sure that everything was accurate and reported wholly and truthfully. With authenticity, you are checking the veracity of the message you are trying to convey. You must ask yourself whether you are doing what you are doing with good intentions. This means that you are not stereotyping, generalizing, or using fear to scare the person into agreement with you. Ultimately, you must make sure that the message you are conveying is done for good reasons. An easy way to test for this is to ask if you would buy into what is being said if you were presented with just the information on its own. For example, if you are trying to persuade someone to buy a car and you were in that person’s situation, such as trying to buy a family car that will fit three car seats, would you take the message that you are presenting as honest, authentic, and trustworthy? If you feel as though you would agree with the reasoning being provided, the message is likely authentic. If you think that you may have a problem with the information presented, you should probably reevaluate the situation and your own behavior and words to make sure you are lining your persuasion up with ethics. Respect Next, you want to evaluate to make sure you are acting and persuading with respect. Are you recognizing the individual needs of the person you are attempting to persuade? Is what you are saying something that you would be comfortable announcing to other people as well, or would you be embarrassed or ashamed to be trying to persuade a perfect stranger of the message you are delivering? For example, if you are attempting to persuade someone to buy a minivan, are you appealing to some sort of gender stereotype, or are you genuinely offering up the benefits a van has to offer completely neutrally, such as discussing how spacious the seats are and how nice it is to have doors that slide open instead of swinging open when you are trying to keep track of kids. If you feel that your message hinges upon something stereotypical in any way, or is not tailored to the individual you are attempting to target with your persuasion, you should probably look into ways you can change the message. You want to make sure that what you are attempting to persuade the other person is not offensive, nor is it done in an offensive manner. You should not, for example, say that the other person must not be educated because they are from a specific minority that has a lower rate of higher education and that because of that, they likely want this one specific car that many lower educated minorities ask for. That would not be appropriate in this situation—it does not respect the individual as a person and is not respectful in general. Avoid the stereotypes and seek to really get to know and understand the individual you are helping in order to ensure that the information you present is as relevant, respectful, and persuasive as possible. Equity The fourth step in analyzing your persuasion, then, is equity. When you are attempting to make sure that your message is equitable, you are seeking to ensure that both you and the other person are on an even playing field. This is incredibly important—you are not looking to lead by coercion or through playing upon the other person’s ignorance. You should seek to make sure that when trying to persuade the other person, you are offering up as much information as possible to ensure that he or she feels that an informed decision is possible. Oftentimes, when people attempt to persuade others, they play off of a lack of information. When someone is misinformed, it is much easier to take advantage of that misinformation. For example, if someone came in for medical treatment and asked for something that was far more expensive and far more than the person actually needed, it would be unethical for the doctor to accept that without ever discussing less invasive options that would be appropriate for treatment. You want to do the same with your persuasion. Back to the example of the car salesperson, if you have someone coming in to trade in his car because he has hit 100,000 miles and the person has always heard that after 100,000 miles, the car is no longer reliable and needs to be replaced. As a salesperson, you may have thought that it would be the perfect opportunity to get in an extra sale, but as the conversation continues, you learn that the person is not in a good place to get a new car, but felt that he had to do so simply because of the mileage, even though everything was working properly. It would be unethical of you not to point out the information that you know would keep the person from buying the car because not pointing that out would simply be taking advantage of his lack of information on the topic. That is not equitable—the other person deserves an even playing field when making decisions, even if giving that information can cause the person to decide against what you are attempting to persuade him to do in the first place. Social Responsibility Finally, the last method to check for ethical persuasion is social responsibility. This is when you stop to see if your persuasion is beneficial advice as a whole. If it is not, how can you change how you are persuading to ensure that you are doing so in a way that protects those who may be at a disadvantage? Remember, the point of persuasion is to convince people to do things on their own—it is not intended to be harmful to other people, nor should it be causing others distress. If your persuasion is generally a good thing and will not have negative implications to the world at large, for example, you are not persuading someone to think of something in a racially biased manner, and it has passed through all of the other steps, then your persuasion method is likely sound and you are free to move forward with it. If it failed anywhere along the way, you are likely going to want to make sure that you are working to make your persuasion methods more ethical. Remember, ethics are respectful. They treat people with basic human decency, something that everyone deserves. Chapter 7 Manipulators ith all this talk of persuasion and ethics, it is time to get your first real look at the darker side of dark psychology. This will focus on the minds of manipulators, really taking a closer look at the most common traits that manipulators share. Interestingly enough, many manipulators can be predicted simply by having a specific pattern to their behaviors. Despite the fact that they all come from different backgrounds, they often present quite similarly. You will stop and take a look at those common traits manipulators typically exert, you will learn about the dark triad, which is a particularly dangerous triad of behaviors that the worst, most dangerous manipulators possess, and some of the most commonly recognized behaviors of manipulators around you. This is essentially a crash course to recognizing and understanding a manipulator, providing you with all of the basics. Remember, with knowledge comes power, and with that power, you can protect yourself from succumbing to the insidious efforts of the manipulators, who seek nothing more than fulfilling their own selfish interests. Traits of Manipulators Manipulators typically follow a playbook, so to speak. They act in certain ways, seek out similar people as targets, and want similar things. These are some of the most common traits of manipulators, as well as examples of each of the behaviors and how each can be beneficial to the manipulator in hurting other people or seeking out what they want. As you read through this, you will begin to recognize all the ways that manipulators, particularly those who hit the dark triad, are missing many of the traits that make us fundamentally human, such as a lack of empathy. Egotistic Oftentimes, manipulators are so busy looking at themselves, their achievements, and their goals, that they refuse to acknowledge that those around them may also have goals of their own that they would like to achieve. The manipulator is far more concerned with his own selfish interest than ensuring that those around him will also be satisfied through life, and he will use those around him as a way to boost his own ego in various ways. For example, he may constantly put down a coworker who he sees as less than him simply because it makes his own ego feel better. Machiavellianism This is a belief that the ends will justify the means. These people are typically quite manipulative, believing that it is okay to tell people what they want to hear to get the right behaviors and that ultimately the only difference between a criminal and an average person is that the criminal got caught. Those with this trait are often quite charming and charismatic to the untrained eye, but everything they do is manipulative. This is part of the dark triad Disengaged morally People who are able to disengage morally do not care about behaving ethically. They do not see those around them as worthy of respect or fair treatment and instead would rather get what they want without regard for the feelings of those around them. They do not care who they hurt or what they have to do—guilt does not occur, no matter what they do. For example, imagine someone who walks down the street and decides to steal a bike that a child left loosely in the yard. The person who is morally disengaged does not care that he has just stolen from a child—it does not matter to him at all. He does not feel bad about the behavior. Narcissism Another of the dark triad, narcissists are people who have a narcissistic personality disorder. They typically meet three key criteria: They have delusions of grandeur, constantly have a need to be the center of attention, and lack the ability to feel empathy. Narcissists frequently manipulate other people into either believing their superiority that they believe is inherent, or they manipulate others to inundate them with admiration and attention to keep their egos happy. For example, the narcissist is likely to exaggerate about achievements to make people more likely to admire him. Entitlement Oftentimes, those who are manipulators believe that they are superior to others. This entitlement needs no evidence to them—they are happy to assert this as true no matter what, and it is up to the rest of the world to prove them wrong. They believe that they are better than others, and that is used as a justification for the manipulation. Since they are clearly superior, they should obviously be the ones making decisions for the rest of the peons who are clearly unable to think properly for themselves. Psychopathy Psychopaths see no reason to behave in a kind, ethical manner because they do not feel empathy. They see no need to pander to the feelings of others when they do not understand the feelings of others. They are also quite impulsive, oftentimes choosing to act upon behaviors that are dangerous or destructive simply because they can. They will manipulate others to get what they want because they are missing the social cues from empathy that would otherwise keep them from doing so. For example, a psychopath may decide he wants something a family member has and pull all the strings attempting to get it, starting out covertly and ultimately threatening the other person with physical harm if it is not given to him. Sadism Those who exhibit sadism enjoy hurting other people. Physical or mental, it does not matter—either is enjoyable for the sadist. These people will manipulate others just for the fun of it, enjoying watching the fallout after the fact. For example, someone who constantly causes problems between friends, telling one friend one thing while telling the other friend the opposite just to cause problems and watch the fallout could be a sadist. Selfishness Oftentimes, manipulators are doing so because they desire to increase their own position in the world with no regards to how it will impact those around them. They see other people as little more than rungs on a ladder to climb up, and because of that, they can justify the manipulation. They are willing to lie to someone to make them fail in order to ensure they get a better job or do better in an interview. So long as the lies and manipulation benefit the selfish manipulator in some way, he is happy to do so. Spitefulness Sometimes, those who are manipulating others do so because they felt the person, they are attempting to manipulate wronged them first. They see the other person as the one at fault and act as such. Even if the manipulation will hurt them in some way or make their situation worse somehow, they are happy to do so simply because they feel that getting back at the other person is worth it. For example, if you have decided to separate from your husband, he may then let the house fall into foreclosure, knowing you cannot pay for it on your own, even though it will absolutely hurt his credit as well. He sees that hit to his own credit and the fact he will lose his home as well as collateral damage. Dark Triad As you can see, there are several different traits that a manipulator can take on. However, the most dangerous, insidious combination of manipulative traits is the dark triad. The dark triad involves narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. These three traits combined create incredibly dangerous people who have been found to be more likely to commit crimes, create social problems, and are regularly destructive in organizations or companies, especially if they manage to get a leadership role of any kind. With the dark triad, people typically lack in empathy, compassion, and a willingness to cooperate. You may remember that all three of those traits are crucial to the survival of the species. People use empathy to communicate and engage in selfless behavior. They engage in compassion to ensure that everyone is taken care of. People use cooperation to foster bonds and make sure that groups like each other while also increasing the chances of survival. Those exhibiting the dark triad are missing the capacity for all of that, making them incredibly dangerous. They are unpredictable to most people, who would never imagine that someone would behave as callously or manipulatively as those who exhibit the dark triad. Because of that, those with the dark triad personality are able to sneak in undetected, suddenly wreak all the havoc they can, and then disappear without a trace, leaving those in his path confused and blindsided to what has happened. If you get involved with someone with the dark triad personality traits, he is likely to be incredibly manipulative with no regard to your own care, and he will be very callous. While he may have seemed great early on, it is little more than an act that is meant to allow him to get into good graces long enough to get what he wants. Recognizing a Manipulator Ultimately, understanding the traits of a manipulator can be incredibly beneficial, but understanding those traits does not protect you if you do not know how to recognize the actions of a manipulator. By learning what the biggest red flag behaviors are, you are more likely to catch on and recognize a manipulator in the act, which leaves you far less vulnerable to their antics and abuse. Manipulators typically share four common characteristics: They are masters at detecting weaknesses in others, they will use those weaknesses they detect against others, they will manipulate others to give something up that works for them, and they will continue to repeat this manipulation until they are stopped, and even then, they will likely continue for a while. When you are trying to identify whether you are dealing with a manipulator, look for these common signs. Acts of Power Manipulators always want power. Their desire to find more power is nearly insatiable—they want more and will do whatever it takes to get it. Because they are frequently in positions where they believe they are superior to others, they will repeatedly act out as such, seeking to push other people to obey them in order to prove they are superior. This is an act of power to them—they get what they want through manipulative methods. Too Good to Be True Manipulators oftentimes start out seeming perfect. This is for a good reason —if they showed their true colors early on, no one would want to put up with them. For this reason, when they are somewhere new, they will spend the time to set up a good rapport with the vast majority of the people around them. They do this several ways, with the most common being through sweet talking and love bombing. These tactics will be discussed in depth later, but are important to keep in mind now. In doing both of these, the manipulator will say exactly what those around him want to hear just to butter them up, and those around him will fall for it. Malignant Humor or Sarcasm Oftentimes, manipulators love to make jokes that are hurtful, and when called out, they tell the other person that it was only a joke. If you see someone constantly hurting others, laughing it off, and blaming the other person for being too serious, he or she may be a manipulator. This humor is seen as a way to show that the manipulator is superior, inflating his or her own ego while putting down the other person. Guilt Trips Oftentimes, manipulators will employ guilt trips as a tactic of choice. This is done in order to guilt the other person into submission, typically done with long sighs and talking about how disappointed they are that they didn’t get what they wanted. They may also use behaviors such as the silent treatment or through berating the other person for not being good enough in hopes of the guilt driving the other person to try better. Guilt trips with manipulators sometimes also involve threats of self harm or suicide, and while they are usually not serious, you should always contact authorities if someone comes to you with intentions of harming themselves or others. Loud Outbursts Oftentimes, manipulators turn aggressive when they feel like something did not work out as planned. Because they see themselves as superior and therefore, an authority in their own mind, they expect others to follow suit. When challenged or feeling as though no one is following through with their expectations, they often get loud and aggressive. This is not only a tantrum similar to what a child would do; it also serves to coerce and intimidate the other parties into submission. Chapter 8 Dark Psychology Defined sychology on its own is powerful—when you understand how people’s minds work, you understand the reasoning behind behaviors. You can see why people would react in the way they did, and also how to expect them to react. Dark psychology is no different— Dark psychology encompasses the study of the minds of those who are ruthless, exploitative, and manipulative. It looks at the minds of the people who are out there to get their own selfish interests met through any means necessary; narcissists, psychopaths, sadists, and other minds that have a tendency toward manipulation have been studied to see what makes them tick, why they do it, and more importantly, how they manage to get others to do exactly what they want. Dark psychology does not have to be evil, though there certainly are people who use it for that purpose. You can study it to protect yourself—when you understand how it works, you become less susceptible to it. You can use it in genuinely positive manners, such as using your skills in persuasion to benefit someone else. You can use it to get the results you want, or even to get better jobs and perform better socially. Just because people with dark personalities utilize the concepts within dark psychology for selfish uses does not mean you have to go down that same path yourself. Traits of Dark Psychology Dark psychology is somewhat unique compared to other schools of psychology, primarily in the fact that it looks solely at insidious behaviors. Its studies manipulation, persuasion, deception, coercion, mind control, and more. It seeks to delve into the minds of those with the darkest personalities, who want to harm others. These people that make up the central focus of dark psychology are described as evil. They do not care about the people around them, nor does the suffering of others bother them. It also assumes that we all have the potential to end up in that role—we all have a dark side somewhere within us, according to dark psychology, but not everyone chooses to behave that way. While that predatory behavior may lurk within everyone, very few actually want to act with it. Those who do act upon their dark impulses usually do so to meet some evolutionary, primary instinct. Humans have three: Sex, aggression, and self preservation. These are survival instincts that are necessary to appeal to survival. Like a pack of wolves, or other carnivorous animals, those who allow their dark sides to rule them hunt with some sort of purpose. They take steps to minimize their own risks, calculating out their moves, and making sure their targets will be easier to overpower. Ultimately, there are six key traits that follow with dark psychology: e It is universal—all humans have the potential for it e It looks at how people think and feel about their ability to prey upon others e It recognizes a spectrum of dark psychology—no two people’s behaviors are the same or as harmful e The spectrum depends on the level of evilness or inhumanity that the perpetrator exhibited in the negative actions e All people share an innate potential for violent, predatory behaviors e Awareness of dark psychology and its concepts allow for people to control those impulses while also recognizing that some of the behaviors spurred by dark psychology are evolutionarily developed for survival. Users of Dark Psychology Despite the insidious nature of dark psychology, plenty of people use it with far fewer evil intentions. Each category below has a different motivation for utilizing dark psychology, and many of the categories of people use them to better people rather than simply out of selfish desire. The key difference in terms of where it falls in the spectrum is understanding when to use it ethically and when to use it selfishly. Politicians Politicians have to be able to read those around them in order to present themselves in ways that are conducive to getting their way. They are able to control their vocal cues, their body language, and behave in ways that come across as confident and authoritative in order to get others to follow them. Their ability to understand human psychology allows them to directly convince others to vote for them or support their causes. Salespeople When your job hinges upon selling or convincing other people to sell, understanding how to be persuasive and convince people to listen to what you have to say is crucial. When you can sway others and encourage them to trust your judgment, you will better be able to maximize your own selling potential, ultimately benefitting you more. Religious leaders Ultimately, religious leaders want people to follow the rules of their religion. They seek a certain level of obedience and trust, which can be earned through understanding how other people perceive them. Through being able to manipulate their own body language and knowing how to word themselves and persuade others in the most effective manner, religious leaders find themselves far more capable of captivating their audiences and swaying them. Cults One of the far more insidious of the example on this list, cults utilize dark psychology and mind control to systematically gain complete and utter control over someone else. They understand the effects of their actions, slowly isolate their targets, and covertly change their mindsets and thoughts, creating perfect pawns that are trapped within their structures. Lawyers Especially in court, lawyers have to know how to present themselves. Especially since the court of law requires people to prove something beyond a doubt, the lawyers must be able to present themselves as thoroughly confident in what they are asserting if they hope to get the results they want. For example, an attorney seeking to prove the innocence of their client must be able to wholeheartedly convince others that he believes the innocence of his client, even if he may doubt the client as well. Narcissists Egotistical and self serving, narcissists also utilize dark psychology regularly to systematically browbeat their targets into submission and to achieve anything they may desire as a result. Through dark psychology, they are able to achieve great results, teaching people around them to respond, guilting them into submission, or even just mind controlling them after some time spent installing the right buttons. Chapter 9 How to Take Advantage of Time as a Manipulator f you will truly advance your skill as a manipulator, you must know how to prevent yourself from getting caught. Recovering yourself from getting caught is a skill all on its own, and when done right you can actually put yourself right back into the position of being able to manipulate the person all over again. Many people are unaware of the necessary action required if you get caught. The reality is that recovering yourself is easy, but it is also a delicate process. You have to be very intentional and specific about how you do it, or you may end up burying yourself further and making it impossible for you to recover. Then, you lose your trustworthiness and credibility and may even tarnish your reputation, further damaging your ability to manipulate anyone in the future. If you get caught, follow these steps. Stay in Control You have to start by staying in control of yourself. Do not allow nervousness or fear to translate into how you are expressing yourself. Keep your voice and body language strong and confident, even if you know that you have already been caught. Immediately switching into a defensive or nervous tone of voice and posture will result in you contradicting everything that you will say in the next step. This means that, no matter how well you say it, you will likely lose the trust and respect of the person that you are trying to manipulate. This will result in a complete failure and loss of your chance of effectively manipulating this person ever again. Staying in control may be hard, especially if you tend to be an expressive or nervous person. For that reason, you want to really take action on this step. Do not even let yourself switch into nervous mode. Instead, keep your posture very strong and true to what you have already been doing, maintain your tone of voice and your vocabulary, and stay completely in control of yourself. The best thing you can do is let the nervous thoughts out of your mind so that the panic does not take over. You can do this by releasing the idea that you are caught and instead believing that you are about to regain control through your self discipline. You are not caught. You are simply being questioned. You are only truly caught if the person walks away convinced that you are a manipulative person. Until that happens, you are still in control. Period. Completely Stop Trying The next step is to completely stop trying to manipulate this person. You need to pull back entirely on every single level. Do not use any intentional persuasion, attempt to relate to them, or any form of manipulative request on them at all. At this point, they will be looking for evidence that suggests that you truly are manipulating them. For now, all they have is a suspicion. Your job is to keep it as a suspicion so that you can get them off of your trail and convince them that you are not, in fact, manipulating them. Once you have entirely thrown the breaks on your attempts, you want to give in to what they are saying. Do not under any circumstances admit to manipulation. Never should you ever say “I agree,” “Yes I was,” or “You are right” to the fact that you are manipulating them. This immediately makes you guilty, and you cannot come back from that. Admitting directly to manipulating will not revive you or make it seem like you were at least being honest in the end. This is not what it will look like to your target. Instead, they will think that had they not caught you, you would have never admitted what you were doing, and you would have manipulated them all the way until the end. Which, of course, you would have. Instead of admitting to manipulating, you need to admit to understanding how they could think that. Period. You are never admitting to anything more than this. “Yes, I can see where you are coming from, but I assure you that is not what I was doing.” “I understand what you mean, and I see how it likely felt that way, I’m sorry that I made you feel that way.” Using admission to the illusion of manipulation but not to manipulation itself is a great way to apologize without pinning yourself as guilty. Then, because you admitted to understanding where they were coming from (and not to manipulation), they are more likely to begin to redevelop their trust in you again. Slowly Get Back on Track After you have admitted to understanding how your actions may have made them feel and you have apologized, you want to start slowly getting back on track with your manipulation. The key word here is slowly. You do not want to rush this. You already had them suspicious and skeptical about you once, you do not want to get to that place again. This time, you need to be extra cautious and make sure that you are extremely careful not to get them suspicious of you again. Coming back once is easy, coming back twice is tough, and coming back three times is impossible. You never want to go past the first come back. You should start by building relatability again. Share authentic stories, agree with the person you are talking to, and use this as an opportunity to rebuild the connection that you had going with you. As long as you do this effectively, it should not take long for you to rebuild the connection. Since you already had one prior to the accusation and the accusation was never affirmed as true, the person will likely find it easier to connect with you the second time around. Once you have built relatability and begun persuading again, you can then move on to an easy manipulation tactic. The best one when recovering from nearly being caught is the Starting Small strategy, as you can slowly request more and more of the person so that they get used to saying yes to you again. This also allows you to see how they respond to your requests so that you can easily gauge the size of the next request based on their response to the last one. Then, you can also determine exactly when to ask the big request so that it comes across as authentic and not manufactured. Remember, you don’t want to get them suspicious of you again, especially not on your big request. Seal the Deal Once you get to the point where you feel that everything is flowing back on track again and everything is running smoothly, you can get back to seal the deal. Carry on just as you would have had you never been accused, but stay very cautious along the way. Cover your trail, act authentically, and do not make it obvious that you are in any way manipulating them to agree with you. That way, you can easily seal the deal with them. The biggest key when you are manipulating someone is to refrain from dropping into “guilt mode.” You do not want to try to make them feel guilty, nor do you want to deny the person’s feelings. Trying to make the person feel guilty will make them look right, as we tend to become defensive when we are guilty of something ourselves. Saying things like “You really think that about me?” or “Do you really think I would do that?” or “I can’t believe you would say that about me!” or anything else that would try and place the blame on them makes it apparent that you are feeling guilty about something. They will immediately think that you are guilty of manipulating them and then they will lose trust in you. Denying what they are saying also won’t work. People do not like to have their feelings denied, and that is exactly what you are doing if you deny manipulating them. That is why when you admit to the situation you say “I admit that I understand why you might feel that way, I’m sorry.” You are admitting to respecting their feelings and validating that they have the right to feel however they are currently feeling. This assures them that you respect them and that you honor their feelings, thus immediately re establishing their trust in you. The difference between an immature and inappropriate response to being caught and a mature and proper response to being caught is that the immature and inappropriate response will keep you caught. Executing the mature and proper response will keep you undercover and allow you to carry on doing whatever it is that you were doing in the first place, only more secretive this time around! Chapter 10 Covert Emotional Manipulation overt emotional manipulation is very important to the art of dark psychology. Many of the tactics that are used with dark psychology are going to use this type of emotional manipulation, whether in part or completely. As you start to learn a bit more about the world of dark psychology and its different manifestations, you will soon start to see the signs of CEM. This is why it is so important to understand what CEM is exactly so that you can watch out for it in your daily life. Covert emotional manipulation, or CEM, is going to be an attempt by one person to try and influence the feelings and the thoughts of the other person in a way that is considered underhanded and that is undetected by the one who is being manipulated. Being able to break down each of the words that are in CEM is important to help you get a better idea on the foundations of this topic. Covert refers to the way that a manipulator is able to hide their intentions. They want to be able to hide the true nature of all their actions. Remember that not all types of influence and emotional manipulation will be categorized as covert. The victims of the type that is covert though will typically not realize they are being manipulated and will not be able to understand the way the manipulation is carried out. In some cases, they are not even able to look and figure out the motivation of their manipulator. This is why CEM is such a stealth bomber in the world of dark psychology. Its point is to avoid detection and defense until it is too late for the victim. The emotional side of the manipulator is going to be the specific focus of that manipulator. Other types of manipulation may include things like the willpower, beliefs, and behaviors of the other person. Many manipulators will focus on this area of influence as they are well aware that the emotions of the other person are key to the other aspects of their personality. Being able to manipulate the emotions of the other person is key. If a person has emotional control over the other person, then they are going to have full control over them. The final piece of CEM is manipulation. It is commonly thought that manipulation and influence are the same things. This is not true though. Manipulation is going to refer to the hidden and underhand process of influence that will take place outside the awareness of the one who is being controlled. The intention behind this compared to someone who has the intention to influence can be a big difference. With an influencer, they are going to go into this with the idea of “I want to help you make a decision that is good for you.” But with the manipulator, they have the thoughts of “I want to secretly control you in order to provide benefit to myself.” As you can see, both of these are quite a bit different, so understanding the intention behind any given behavior is going to be a large part in deciding whether the situation is covert emotional manipulation or not. Situation and Manipulations There are four main scenarios in which CEM is able to take place. These include the family, romantic, personal, and professional parts of your life. One of the most common forms of CEM is romantic, and it can sometimes be the most deadly. There are some less obvious forms of CEM that you are able to find anywhere, and because they are less common, they can sometimes be the most dangerous. A good example of CEM is a controlling romantic partner. If a woman is in a relationship and her partner is trying to control her, she is going to be disgusted by what is going on, once she figures it out. She may want to find a way to get out of the situation. Because of this, many times the controlling partner is going to exercise their influence as covertly as possible. They don’t want their partner to know they are being controlled, or the victim leaves, and there is no one left to control. If the manipulator is successful, then their wife or their girlfriend will continue to be a victim of emotional manipulation, and they may have a hard time realizing that it is going on. This allows the manipulator to keep the control that they want without any risk of being discovered and losing the other person for good. This can also happen with a friend who would use CEM in order to get the outcomes they want when they have a relationship with another person. In this group, one of the common types of manipulators is going to be someone who covertly induced feelings of obligation, sympathy, and guilt in a friend. The friend is being manipulated in this way without being aware that they are being influenced. They may realize that they are behaving in a different way to that friend, but they won’t be able to explain why and how. You will find that the professional part of your life can be another place for covert emotional manipulators. There are a lot of people who have worked for a boss or another person who had authority, who seems to trigger some unknown feelings of duty, fear, and guilt in them. People who are manipulated this way may never be able to identify why these feelings exist or where they come from. And in the world of CEM, the family can be the most problematic. A skilled manipulator is able to find a victim, even within their own family, and the amount of influence that they exercise can be dangerous. This is because the manipulator and the victim will have a very deep connection together because they are related. When blood relations are added in, the amount of influence and control can increase quite a bit. The reason that these family situations are so suited to using CEM is that most people already feel a level of social obligation in order to help their own family. They are willing to go a little further to ensure the needs of their family are attended to. Because of this predisposition, covert emotional manipulative practices will give you a victim that is very malleable. Some Common Covert Manipulation Methods We have spent some time talking about what covert manipulation is all about and how it can be used to benefit the manipulator. Now it is time to look at a few of the different methods that can be used in covert manipulation. These are meant to bring out feelings of guilt, sadness, or something else. The manipulator also wants to make sure that they can do all of this without the victim detecting them if at all possible. Let’s take a look at some of the techniques that are used by people practicing CEM. Love Bombing Love bombing is a technique that many emotional manipulators will use when they get started with their interactions with their victim. It is going to involve an intense, sudden, and forceful display of lots of positive feelings to a victim. This may seem a bit counterintuitive in the beginning when we are talking about CEM. If the manipulator is trying to cause harm to someone, why would they work to intensify the positivity in the beginning? It’s because doing this can serve their own objectives. The idea behind working with love bombing is that it is going to create an intense feeling of affection, trust, and compliance from the victim over to their manipulator. The extent of which love bombing is going to be used, and the person it is used on, will often depend on how the manipulator assesses the situation. A victim who seems lonely, seeking support, comfort, and desperate is more likely to be love bombed and at a higher intensity than others. If the victim is more grounded, then they will need a less intense, and maybe more subtle, way in the love bombing. Reinforcement: A CEM Stacked Sequence After the love bombing, a pattern of intermittent positive reinforcement is going to show up. This is a way of controlling the victim without them really knowing what is going on. The typical sequence of a CEM scenario is going to involve love bombing, then positive reinforcement, and then intermittent positive reinforcement. Let’s take a look at how this is done and how it benefits the manipulator. Love bombing is going to be the unconditional, unearned, and intense display of positivity that comes from a manipulator to their target. This is going to happen right when the two meet and start interacting with each other. The purpose of this is to help soften up the defenses of the victim and can make the victim more reliant on the person who is manipulating them. This helps set the frame of a positive friendship, relationship, or another form that this interaction takes. After love bombing has occurred early in the relationship, it is time for the manipulator to move over to positive reinforcement. This is when the manipulator is going to switch their behavior, and they will no longer show unconditional positivity to the victim. Instead, the manipulator is going to withhold any positivity until the victim is performing the behavior that they desire. A good example of this is when the manipulator wants to make sure that the victim calls them on a regular basis. The manipulator is only going to show a positive response when the victim does this. If the manipulator does this in a positive way, then the victim will be unaware that this positive attention is being used in a strategic manner against them. They will simply start to comply with the wishes of the manipulator because they want to experience those good feelings again. This type of predictable positive reinforcement, after it has been used for some time, is going to then be replaced by Intermittent Positive Reinforcement, which is also known as IPR. This IPR is going to involve withholding of expressions of positivity, even when the desired behavior is displayed. For example, let’s say that the manipulator wants their victim to offer to purchase them things. And when the victim complies, the manipulator is going to only reward this behavior with their positive response on occasion, and not all the time. This type of unpredictability is going to cause a deep, subconscious craving for the victim to want more positive attention. But the victim won’t even realize what is going on. They will chase that good reaction from the manipulator using any means that they can. The manipulator is going to win because they have their victim behaving in a specific way, and the victim will not really have an awareness of what they are doing or why they are doing it. Reality Denial One of the most terrifying things that a human can endure is the feeling that they are losing their own sanity. This is bad enough if it is explained by something that the victim can understand, such as a byproduct of stress in their lives. But this can be really unsettling if this insanity feeling is induced by the emotional manipulator. Reality denial is going to refer to a range of techniques used in CEM that have the purpose of destroying the sanity of the victim in order to serve the selfish aims. The ways that this takes place, and its impact, will vary based on the method that works the best for the manipulator. One of the main ideas of reality denial is that it happens gradually. If the manipulator tries to do it all at once, the victim is going to notice and will stay away. Because of this, the manipulator is unlikely to instantly aim to destroy the sanity of their victim right away. This type of outcome is almost impossible for you to achieve without being detected. Instead of doing this, a skilled manipulator is going to take a slower but steady approach. This means they are going to slowly erode at the sanity of the other person until that victim isn’t able to trust their own faculties. But how does the manipulator turn this reality denial process on? It is often going to start with a small scale undermining of the confidence of a victim in their own memory. The manipulator will then be able to engineer various situations where the victim will feel like they need to question their own recollection of events. They won’t know what is true and what isn’t any longer. Of course, during this process, the manipulator is going to ensure that the portrayal of what really happened is the one that seems the most credible to their victim. This process of slowly eroding the confidence of the victim is going to serve two purposes to the manipulator. First, it is going to reduce the amount of trust the victim has in their own powers of understanding and recall. Second, this trust will then be moved over to the manipulator. One thing to remember is that this transference of trust is never going to be that big of a deal in the transaction, especially in the beginning. When the manipulator gets started, it is simply going to look like they are the one who has a slightly better memory than the victim. The victim may even be thankful that they have someone around whose recollection they are actually able to rely on, rather than seeing this as a form of manipulation that is being used against them by the manipulator. Of course, this is going to start increasing over time as well. The covert emotional manipulator is going to start increasing the severity of the events that they want the victim to question. What may seem like a harmless and even insignificant situation, in the beginning, is going to amplify. It will eventually reach the point where the victim seems to lose all their own confidence in their cognitive powers and will question their own sanity. The part of this process that seems the most insidious most of the time is the fact that the victim is often going to start blaming their own mind for losing these abilities. A skilled manipulator is not going to be seen as the one who is pulling strings. Even though they are in charge of this slow demise in the sanity, they will never let their victim know what is going on behind the scenes. These different methods can often be used together. But the key is that they need to be done covertly. If the victim realizes what is going on, they will walk away and refuse to be influenced by the manipulator. But skilled manipulators are able to use the different techniques above in order to get the victim to behave in a certain way, and the victim usually doesn’t realize what is going on or why they feel a certain way. Chapter 11 Deception nderstanding what gives deception away is an essential part of learning how to become a good liar. You can lie through your teeth, but it will create more harm than good if you don’t know how to avoid detection. A good liar is able to act natural, but he is also prepared. He knows what to say and do when people try to detect his dishonesty. A good liar is also wise about lying. He thinks, why lie when he doesn’t have to? Lying takes a lot of effort. He knows that if he conserves that energy for when he really needs it, he will be a better liar on the rare occasions when he lies. He also knows that he will earn an honest reputation and won’t earn the mistrust of others. So here are some tips on how to become such a good liar that you could even fool an FBI interrogator, who is an expert at catching liars. Have a Reason Lying all the time is no way to become a good liar. Sure, practice makes perfect, but when you lie a lot, you run the risk of getting sloppy. You damage your honest reputation. If you are a known liar, no one will believe you. You’re more likely to get caught in lies in the future if people suspect that you lie about everything. It is far better to have an honest reputation, where people think that you a good person who never lies. Then people won’t have as much reason to suspect you of dishonesty. Of course, this means that you should be honest more than you should be dishonest. Save the lying for when you really need to lie. Basically, only lie when you have a good reason to. Weigh each situation in your head. What would the consequences of the truth be? You might make someone unhappy with the truth, but will that unhappiness go away? Is this something that other people can get over? Or will it ruin your reputation, your friendships, and more? If you have a lot to lose by telling the truth, still consider telling the truth. People will often forgive you for the truth. Lying makes things ten times worse. But if you absolutely cannot tell the truth, then you can consider lying. The more you need to lie, the more likely you are to pull it off. You stand to lose a lot and you have great motivation for lying. Therefore, you will do your best to tell a convincing lie. Rehearse Before you lie, it is best to organize your mind. Get things right so that when you tell your tale, you won’t mess up. First, determine your target. Who are you lying to and why? What story will make the most sense to this person and minimize your risk of getting caught? Know who you will be lying to in order to design the best lie possible. Second, think up a logical story. Fill in all gaps. Come up with lots of details to make your story believable. Think of questions or problems that others may bring up and come up with explanations. You may have to think fast but don’t let that get you nervous. This is a chance to be very creative. Next, practice your lie in your head so that you memorize it. That way, when you’re on the spot being interrogated, you are prepared with what to say. You won’t spend as much time scrambling to make up details on the spot and creating an incoherent story that gives away your deception. Watch Your Tenses Liars tend to mess up the tenses of their sentences when they are fabricating part of a story. When someone is reviewing true events that occurred in the past, they will naturally use the past tense. When they switch to a fabrication, their brain suddenly is in the present, trying to invent a story on the spot. Thus, they start using the present tense. Watching out for rapid and unexplained tense switches or jumps in conversation is a great way to spot if someone is being less than truthful. But you can also use this knowledge for your own excellent lying. Avoid detection by rehearsing your story beforehand and being careful to maintain the same tense. Tell the Truth as much as Possible Another great secret to lying well is to tell the truth...in a misleading way. The more truth that is in your lie, the easier it is for others to verify. You look more honest this way. You also can blame lapses in truth on faulty memory, should anyone find out about the bit of falsehood that you snuck in with the truth. Lying by Omission Lying by omission is one way to do this. You tell the truth, but leave out one key detail. However, you want to make sure that this detail is totally obscured. People know all about lying by omission. They will watch you for this. You need to have a good cover for the event that someone spots your omission. When you omit part of a story, make sure that there are no obvious holes. You want to make sure that the story connects. So, when you leave something out, the story overall is still cohesive. You can make up a few details to bridge the gap. Deliberate Misleading How you word things is also a great way to mislead people without outright lying. You can use certain phrasing that leads people to draw wrong conclusions on their own. If they ever find out the truth and confront you for lying, you can say, “But I told you the truth!” Really, you did. Deliberate misleading is a pretty advanced technique. Learning how to use language to purposefully mislead someone without getting caught is an art. But that’s why you’ve graduated to Dark Psychology 202, right? The art of misleading requires you to make others draw incorrect conclusions on their own. Offering just a few certain words can make someone believe something that you are not really saying. People tend to draw ideas from their own biases. Knowing someone’s bias helps you figure out what conclusions they are likely to draw based on the language you use. Here are a few examples that can show how misleading works. From there, you can build your own misleading tales when you need to. Someone asks you if a girl is your girlfriend. You like her so you don’t want him to hit on her, but meanwhile she isn’t yours. Instead of telling a direct lie that she is your girlfriend, you can just say, “We talk.” That’s so vague, but it means different things to different people. This guy will probably infer from it that you two have something going on. Your mother wants to know where you have been. You can tell her that you went to a friend’s house and then start talking about how your best friend Mark’s sister kept saying something funny. She will infer from this that you were probably at Mark’s house. In reality, you never told her whose house you were at. Your boss asks why a project isn’t moving forward. You honestly haven’t had time to get it done, but you don’t want to lose your job. So, you say: “Events have transpired that making moving forward difficult but I’m on it.” Your boss may guess that the events you speak of are hurdles that you encountered with the project. He won’t guess that really these events are just personal events that have prevented you from dedicating your full time to this project. True Details in a Lie When you lie, you can still include bits and pieces of the truth. Pepper your lie with truthful details as much as possible. The more truthful details you can include in your story, the better. You want to avoid fabricating as much as possible. This is good for two reasons: the first reason is that the fewer untruths you make up, the less you have to remember. Making things up takes some energy and effort, so it’s best to conserve that energy as much as possible. The second reason is that truthful details are verifiable. That makes it seem like you are telling the truth and nothing but the truth. You can tell someone that you were at a friend’s house. Then provide some real details about the house and the party that you heard through a friend. This makes it seem like you were actually there. False Confession Admitting to something embarrassing or revealing a secret can help confirm your innocence. You want to distract people and convince them of your innocence by claiming that you were doing something embarrassing and personal. You also build trust and create a false bond when you tell someone a secret. Let’s say you were in the wrong place at the wrong time. You don’t want to admit to what you were really doing, so you make up something else nefarious that is a little less terrible than what you were actually doing. So, you could say: “I was seeing my mistress” or “I was at the porn shop.” This embarrassing confession both explains why you were where you were and it makes others uncomfortable. They are less likely to press the line of questioning. They will also think that you are telling the truth, since the truth must have been hard for you to admit. Posture and Eye Contact Your physical moves are what usually give away your deception. Lying takes a lot of mental energy and emotional discomfort. This manifests in your eye contact, gestures, and movements. Physical clues that give away the fact that you are lying are usually called “tells”. Everyone has a tell. But if you want to avoid detection, you must never reveal your tell. First, let’s look at some of the common ways that liars act when they’re trying to deceive someone. Grooming: Excessive grooming indicates that a liar feels dirty or bad subconsciously. He makes up for this by grooming his facial hair, straightening his tie or clothes, cleaning his nails, or otherwise performing grooming gestures while talking. Organizing. Much like grooming, a liar feels disorganized when he lies. He attempts to make up for this by organizing the environment around him. He might straighten papers on the desk in front of him, for instance. Lack of Eye Contact. A liar who is afraid of giving away his deception won’t want to make direct eye contact. He will look anywhere but into your eyes. He may become overly focused on a point in the distance to allow him to stall as he thinks of a story, or he may look to his right as he uses his imagination to come up with something. Too Much Eye Contact. The reverse of this is the liar who makes too much eye contact to convince someone of his honesty. Too much or too little eye contact is never good. Try to make a normal amount. Stuttering. As he stalls for time to think of a lie, he will stutter and use lots of meaningless filler words. He might even mumble, so that it’s impossible to understand what he says. There are just his ways of stalling for time and making it difficult to hear what he has to say. e Fidgeting. Fidgeting denotes nervousness. A liar will fidget in his seat, pick at things, play with his hair, drum his fingers on the table, bite his lips, chew his nails, play with some small object like a paper clip, or some other nervous gesture. A good liar will be relaxed and calm. Believe Your Own Lie Why do people lie? Usually, people are inherently honest. But they will rapidly become dirty, rotten liars when they know that someone will disapprove of their actions. Keeping this in mind can help you become a better liar. Consider how you want to please someone. Then create a reality that would please that person. Believe in that reality. Strive to please them. This will motivate you to not only lie, but to lie well. The key to lying is to become comfortable with it. How can you do this? One way is to make yourself believe your own lie. This is the trick that pathological liars use. They literally create false realities in their minds to convince themselves that they aren’t lying. Then they tell their false stories with conviction, as if their stories are real. These ties into rehearsal. Rehearsing lies is essential to lying well. Rehearse your reality. Avoid Common Phrases A lot of people have common phrases that set off alarm bells. Learn these phrases so that you can avoid them. Here are some major ones. “Why would I lie?” “Would I ever lie to you?” “Have I ever lied to you before?” These defensive phrases are telltale signs that someone is lying, so avoid using them. A liar wants to convince someone that he or she is being honest. An honest person doesn’t have to do this. So, don’t dedicate too much time to convincing someone of your honesty. Rather, behave calmly, as if you are comfortable with the fact that you are telling the truth. People will be more likely to believe you. If you dedicate too much time to convincing someone that you are innocent, then you will provide a dead giveaway that you are lying. Getting super defensive or indignant when people don’t believe what you tell them is another form of subterfuge, where you are basically trying to distract from the lie. Don’t get too defensive or people will see red flags. Instead, act like your honor is everything to you and you are committed to convincing this person. How would you feel if you were actually being honest? Imagine that feeling and then channel it. Lying is a bit like acting. You want to act innocent and behave just as you would if you were being unfairly accused of lying. You might get adamant and emotional, but you’re not going to act like you’re offended. Convincing someone that you’re not lying would be your priority as an honest person. Don’t Be Evasive Liars are evasive of the truth. Therefore, they try to avoid answering questions. Their dodging of questions not only frustrated the person who is asking, but it gives away the fact that they are not comfortable with this conversation for some reason. Therefore, being direct makes you appear honest. There are many forms of deceptive evasion. The most common is changing the subject. A liar will want to get off of the uncomfortable subject for fear of giving away the fact that he is being dishonest. As a result, he wants to switch topics as rapidly as possible. Beat the average liar’s game by casually agreeing to remain on the subject. You don’t need to keep talking about it, but as long as the other person wants to talk about it, you can keep providing details and answering questions. A rapid subject change is always suspicious, so never does that. Another form of evasion is being very vague. A liar will be vague to avoid giving away too many details. Details can get messy. But if you choose to be direct and provide lots of details, you appear honest. You set people at ease. Don’t use vague language; stick to direct and clear terms. People will assume that a liar doesn’t speak so directly and tacitly. A common way that liars use vagueness is by using the passive tense. “The door got locked,” is something a liar would say. But now that you know better, you would say, “I locked the door.” Don’t try to escape responsibility with passive language. Other people can see right through that ploy. Liars will also use “softer” language to lessen the impact of what they did and ease the burden of their guilt. For instance, a liar might say, “The painting was taken,” rather than “The painting was stolen.” Stolen is a stronger word than taken so liars don’t want to use it. However, you can stay a step ahead of most liars and use the proper terms for what you are talking about. An evasive person will also try his very hardest to avoid talking about the situation that he is being dishonest about. He will do anything to dodge talking about it. Thus, he will try to evade answering questions by asking questions of his own, joking around, and otherwise trying to distract the interrogator. Distractions are one of the sneakiest forms of evasion. Staying on topic is a good way to establish the sense that you are telling the truth. One way to spot a liar is when he or she tries a little too hard to be non evasive and gets a little too involved. For instance, if there is an organizational investigation into a theft in the office, you can bet the person who screams the loudest about the theft is guilty. He or she thinks that by being very involved, he or she will seem innocent and will escape detection. But being too involved is very suspicious. You don’t want to be evasive, but you don’t want to be over involved. Strike a rather neutral balance. Chapter 12 How to Avoid Dark Emotional Persuasion nderstanding brain research is the way to understanding basic leadership forms. Frequently, what you ponder how choices are made and why transformations happen isn't so highly contrasting. Numerous individuals think a coherent contention with facts, figures, and item specs is the best (and just) course. Truly the mind is very emotional. A superior comprehension of how the cerebrum settles on choices and how emotional persuasion functions will assist you with improving transformations (and your main concern). To begin with, for what reason does emotional persuasion make a difference? You're not as in charge of your choices as you might suspect you seem to be. The uplifting news? Nor are your clients, and you can utilize that to further your potential benefit. We like to believe we're sensible individuals settling on logical choices, particularly with regards to how we go through our well deserved cash. Enter double procedure hypothesis, which expresses that there are two unique frameworks inside your mind: framework one and framework two. Framework one is your emotional processor. It's programmed and oblivious. Framework two is your logical processor. It's controlled and conscious, yet much slower. Framework two is effectively exhausted because it's moderate and requires your full core interest. The additional time you spend thinking fundamentally for the day, the less and less you'll see framework two spring up when it's a great opportunity to settle on a choice. Framework one, then again, is consistently near, which is the reason you may at first settle on an emotional choice and legitimize it later. System two doesn't prefer to think a choice was made absolutely upon feeling, so it defends the emotional choice afterward. For instance, suppose you purchased a costly garments thing on the web late around evening time following a long, hard day at work. By the following morning, framework two will probably have guaranteed you that the free sending and an up and coming occasion make the pricy buy consistent. Things being what they are, framework one is a tremendous factor in basic leadership, isn't that so? However, advertisers keep on speaking to framework two, the sensible processor, solely. Regardless of whether your item happens to be the most intelligent choice in your whole industry, there's a strong possibility your client's framework two will be exhausted at the time, making her default to framework one. Framework one and framework two work as a basic leadership group. In a perfect world, your store will convince the two frameworks; however, if you need to pick between the two, pick framework one since it doesn't get depleted. TL;DR? We're emotional individuals settling on, for the most part, emotional choices. It's an ideal opportunity to begin advancing as needs are and quit discounting emotional persuasion as tentative voodoo. The Most Effective Method to Get Emotional Persuasion Right Before you begin, there are a couple of more things you have to know. Feelings are precarious when all is said in done, let alone as a persuasion tool. Here's the manner by which to hit the nail on the head the first run through (save yourself the hard exercises). 1. Have a well characterized process. Feelings are messy and complex, which is the reason a characterized procedure to control you is much more basic than expected. You know the nuts and bolts, you've seen a few models, and however, it's insufficient. You have to realize how to apply emotional persuasion systems to your particular crowd. You'll see this procedure looks somewhat like the optimization and development process, yet with attention to emotional persuasion and subjective research (reviews, interviews, etc.): Picture Source The emphasis on subjective research enables you to become client driven rather than item determined, which is significant in light of the fact that what works for one store probably won't work for another. High valence, high excitement may be a bad decision for your store, for instance. Or, on the other hand, possibly simply how you actualized it will flounder. However, you're in the correct quadrant. Wiping out this vulnerability means leading subjective research. 2. Guarantee duplicate and configuration cooperate in an inspiring feeling. Emotional persuasion strategies can be separated into two classes: duplicate and structure. In a perfect world, the two work together to disclose to one firm story and bring out a specific feeling. Emotional persuasion in duplicate comes in two structures: feeling words and emotional narrating. Feeling words are also generally known as passionate trigger words. A few words are innately more passionate than others, so the particular words you select convey a great deal of importance. For instance: e Private or secret: which is a feeling word? e Fast or moment: What is a feeling word? e Happy or lighthearted: which is a feeling word? If you speculated mystery, moment, and lighthearted, you're correct. Here are some other feeling words you can utilize: . Serene (high valence, low arousal). . Uplifted (high valence, low arousal). . Unburdened (high valence, low arousal). . Light (high valence, low arousal). . Meditative (high valence, low arousal). . Centered (high valence, low arousal). . Bold (high valence, high arousal). . Brave (high valence, high arousal). Oo AN A a A WU N e . Eager (high valence, high arousal). 10. Daring (high valence, high arousal). 11. Dynamic (high valence, high arousal). 12. In the Zone (high valence, high arousal). 13. Vulnerable (low valence, low arousal). 14. Trapped (low valence, low arousal). 15. Threatened (low valence, low arousal). 16. Disempowered (low valence, low arousal). 17. Insecure (low valence, low arousal). 18. Paralyzed (low valence, low arousal). Presently, the fact of the matter isn't that a single word is going to soar your change rate. It's that a few words are bound to trigger feelings than others, which you can use to further your potential benefit. Attempt to sprinkle feeling words all through your duplicate. Keep in mind; these are simple models. The best feeling words will originate from your subjective research. Storytelling is another key segment of sincerely powerful duplicate. Have you at any point begun a film at home and felt constrained to watch it right through, even though you chose you loathed it 30 minutes in? Or then again read a book completely through, even though you quit getting a charge out of it on page 60? Studies have demonstrated that our minds are substantially more connected by narrating than realities. You can utilize narrating in various manners. Possibly you recount to an anecdote about how the item came to fruition. Or on the other hand, you recount to another client's tale about your item. Or on the other hand, you assist clients with envisioning their very own story with your item. It's up to you, yet a story is substantially more relatable than a brand. Consider motion pictures like getting out or Hidden Figures, which utilized storytelling and emotional persuasion to express what is on their mind. Or on the other hand, consider organizations that have constructed a faithful after gratitude to their bold hero, similar to Apple. Emotional persuasion in configuration comes in three structures: textual Style, shading, and pictures. e Are you acquainted with the possibility that it's not what you State, it's how you state it? On the web, text style is how. The textual style you pick is affecting the feelings of your guests, regardless of whether you understand it or not. e The Internet is no more interesting to the idea of shading brain science. An inconceivable 62 90% of a guest's underlying appraisal of your store depends on shading alone. 84.7% of shoppers in an investigation said that shading was the essential explanation they acquired something. Let's get straight to the point. However, it's not highly contrasting. For instance, yellow is viewed as an exceptionally happy coloring, correct? Yet, everything is logical, and coloring needs to work with other emotional structure factors, not the only one. e Arrows, hands, and eyes can be utilized to coordinate consideration. (One investigation found that hand drawn bolts do this best.) Facial expressions can be utilized to inspire feeling. (All things considered; one individual's feelings can trigger similar feelings in another person.) Contrast can cause to notice feeling words and pictures. The list goes on and on. Once more, what's significant here is that these elements cooperate. Duplicate and configuration can't work in storehouses; coloring alone isn't sufficient to sincerely convince, and so on. 3. Try not to set your sights excessively little. Since you need the entirety of the emotional persuasion systems to cooperate at the same time, you'll likely wind up with a variation that appears to be a lot of unique from your unique store. This is something to be thankful for. While you may be utilized to minor A/B tests, it bodes well to pull out all the stops for this situation. For instance, A/B testing the presence of a couple of feeling words or a catch shading change would be inconsequential. Rather, you need to test a new look and feel concentrated on summoning your ideal feeling. 4. Get an emotional baseline. How do your guests feel when they visit your site by and large? Investigate this during your subjective research stage with the goal that you can get a benchmark. For instance, somebody visiting an outside attire store may be feeling bold while somebody visiting a bank's site may be feeling focused. You need to bring out a particular feeling, isn't that so? You can't do that as successfully on the off chance that you don't understand the normal appearance feeling. For instance, suppose you're attempting to fulfill somebody. You may adopt an alternate strategy if they're feeling mad, if they're feeling sad, if they're feeling stressed, etc. Chapter 13 Dark Persuasion and Dark Persuasion Techniques ersuasion is an interesting topic. There are lots of persuasions that are considered just fine in society. They are acceptable, and even some people hold jobs where they will spend a lot of time trying to persuade others. Any attempt by one person to influence someone else to do some action can be persuasion. A salesperson at a car dealership is using persuasion because they try to persuade someone to purchase a new vehicle. This isn’t seen as something sinister or bad. The difference here is that this persuasion and other similar examples of persuasion benefit both parties. The car dealer makes a sale and some money, and the “victim” is going to get a new Vehicle. There are a lot of legitimate types of persuasion that aren’t considered part of dark psychology. The car dealer above is an example. If a negotiator uses their skills to persuade a terrorist to let their hostage go, this is a good form of persuasion. If you convince someone to come along to an event that they will enjoy, then this is a good form of persuasion. This type of persuasion is seen as positive persuasion. But then, what would count as dark persuasion? Understanding Dark Persuasion The first difference you will notice between positive and dark persuasion is the motive behind it. Positive persuasion is used in order to encourage someone to complete an action that isn’t going to cause them any harm. In some cases, such as with the negotiator saving a hostage, this persuasion can be used to help save lives. But with dark persuasion, there isn’t really any form of moral motive. The motive is usually amoral, and often immoral. If positive persuasion is understood as a way to help people help themselves, then dark persuasion is more of the process of making people act against their own self interest. Sometimes, people are going to do these actions begrudgingly, knowing that they are probably not making the right choice, but they do it because they are eager to stop the incessant persuasion efforts. In other cases, the best dark persuader is going to make their victim think that they acted wisely, but the victim is actually doing the opposite in that case. So, what are the motivations for someone who is a dark persuader? This is going to depend on the situation and the individual who is doing the persuading. Some people like to persuade their victims in order to serve their own self interests. Others are going to act through with the intention just to cause some harm to the other person. In some cases, the persuader is not going to really benefit from darkly persuading their victim, but they do so because they want to inflict pain on the other person. And still, others enjoy the control that this kind of persuasion gives to them. You will also find that the outcome you get from dark persuasion is going to differ from what happens with positive persuasion. With positive persuasion, you are going to get one of three scenarios including the following: e The benefit goes to the person who is being persuaded. e There is a win/win benefit for the persuaded and the persuader. e There is a mutual benefit for the person who is persuaded and a third party. All of these outcomes are good because they will involve a positive result for the person who is being persuaded. Sometimes, there will be others who benefit from these actions. But out of all three situations, the persuaded party is always going to benefit. With dark persuasion, the outcome is going to be very different. The persuader is the one who will always benefit when they exercise their need for influence or control. The one who is being persuaded often goes against what is in their self interest when they listen, and they are not going to benefit from all this dark persuasion. In addition, the most skilled dark persuaders are not only able to cause some harm to their victims while also benefiting themselves, but they could also end up harming others in the process. Unmasking the Dark Persuader At this point, you may be curious about who is using these dark methods of persuasion. Are there actually people out there who are interested in using this kind of persuasion and using it against others to cause harm? The main characteristics of a dark persuader are either an indifference toward or an inability to care about how persuasion is going to impact others. Such people who use this kind of persuasion are going to be often narcissistic and will see their own needs as more important than the needs of others. They may even be sociopathic and unable to grasp the idea of someone else’s emotions. Many times, this kind of dark persuasion is going to show up in a relationship. Often one but sometimes both partners are going to be inclined towards trying to use dark persuasion on each other. If these attempts are persistent and endure, then this type of relationship is going to be classified as psychologically abusive, and that is not healthy for the victim in that relationship. Often, they will not realize that there is something going on or that they are darkly persuaded until it is too late, and they are stuck there. There are many examples of using this kind of dark persuasion in a relationship. If one partner stops the other partner from taking a new job opportunity or doesn’t allow them to go out with friends, then this could be an example of dark persuasion. The dark persuader will work to convince the victim that they are acting in a way that is best for the relationship. In reality, the victim is going through a process that harms them and the relationship. Dark Persuasion Techniques to Be on the Lookout For After taking a look at the different types of persuasion and what they all mean, you may be able to see why dark persuasion is such a bad thing and can be harmful to the victim. Being able to recognize the different techniques that the manipulator may use can make it easier to understand when it is being used on you. So, how exactly is a dark persuader able to use this idea in order to carry out their wishes? There are a few different types of tactics that a dark manipulator is going to use, but some of the most common options include: The Long Con The first method that we are going to look at is the Long Con. This method is kind of slow and drawn out, but it can be really effective because it takes so long and is hard to recognize or even pinpoint when something went wrong. One of the main reasons that some people have the ability to resist persuasion is because they feel that they are being pressured by the other person, and this can make them back off. If they feel that there is a lack of rapport or trust with the person who is trying to persuade them, they will steer clear as well. The Long Con is so effective because they are able to overcome these main problems and give the persuader exactly what they want. The Long Con is going to involve the dark persuader to take their time, working to earn the trust of their victim. They are going to take some time to befriend the victim and make sure that their victim trusts and likes them. This is going to be achieved by the persuader with artificial rapport building, which sometimes seems excessive, and other techniques that will help to increase the comfort levels between the persuader and their victim. As soon as the persuader sees that the victim is properly readied psychologically, the persuader is going to begin their attempts. They may Start out with some insincere positive persuasion. The persuader is going to lead their victim into making a choice or doing some action that will actually benefit the persuader. This is going to serve the persuader in two ways. First, the victim starts to become used to persuasion by that persuader. The second is that the victim is going to start making that mental association between a positive outcome and the persuasion. The Long Con is going to take a long period of time to complete because the persuader doesn’t want to make it too obvious what they are doing. An example of this is a victim who is a recently widowed lady who is vulnerable because of her age and from their bereavement. After her loss, a man starts to befriend her. This man may be someone she knows from church or even a relative. He starts to spend more time with her, showing immense kindness and patience, and it doesn’t take too long for her guard to drop when he comes around. Then this man starts to carry out some smaller acts of positive persuasion that we talked about before. He may advise her of a better bank account to use or a better way to reduce any monthly bills. The victim is going to appreciate these efforts and the fact that the man is trying to help her, and she takes the advice. Over some time, the man then tries to use some dark persuasion. He may try to persuade her to let him invest some of her money. She obliges because of the positive persuasion that was used in the past. Of course, the man is going to work to take everything he can get from her. If the manipulator is skilled enough, she may feel that he actually tried to help her, but the money is lost because he just ran into some bad luck with the investment. This is how far dark persuasion can go. Graduality Often when we hear about acts of dark persuasion, it seems impossible and unbelievable. What they fail to realize is that this dark persuasion isn’t ever going to be a big or a sudden request that comes out of nowhere. Dark persuasion is more like a staircase. The dark persuader is never going to ask the victim to do something big and dramatic the first time they meet. Instead, they will have the victim take one step at a time. When the manipulator has the target only go one step at a time, the whole process seems like less of a big deal. Before the victim knows it, they have already gone a long way down, and the persuader isn’t likely to let them leave or come back up again. Let’s take an example of how this process is going to look in real life. Let’s say that there is a criminal who wanted to make it so that someone else committed the crimes for them. Gang bosses, cult leaders, and even Charles Manson did this exact same thing. This criminal wouldn’t dream of beginning the process by asking their victim to murder for them. This would send out a red flag, and no one in their right minds would willingly go out and kill for someone they barely know. Instead, the criminal would start out by having the victim do something small, like a petty crime, or simply hiding a weapon for them. Something that isn’t that big of a deal for the victim, at least in comparison. Over time, the acts that the manipulator is able to persuade their victim to do will become more severe. And since they did the smaller crimes, the persuader now has the unseen leverage of holding some of those smaller misdeeds over the victim, kind of like for blackmail. Before the victim knows it, they are going to feel like they are in too deep. They will then be persuaded to carry out some of the most shocking crimes. And often, by this point, they will do it because they feel like they have no other choice. Dark persuaders are going to be experts at using this graduality to help increase the severity of their persuasion over time. They know that no victim would be willing to jump the canyon or do the big crime or misdeed right away. So, the persuader works to build a bridge to get there. By the time the victim sees how far in they are, it is too late to turn back. Masking the True Intentions There are different methods that a persuader is able to use dark psychology in order to get the things that they want. Disguising their true desires is very important for them to be successful. The best persuaders can use this approach in a variety of ways, but the method they choose is often going to depend on the victim and the situation. One principle that is used by a persuader is the idea that many people are going to have a difficult time refusing two requests when they happen in a row. Let’s say that the persuader wants to get $200 from the victim, but they do not intend to repay the money. To start, the persuader may begin by saying that they need a loan for the amount of $1000. They may go into some details about the consequences to themselves if the persuader doesn’t come up with that kind of money sometime soon. It may happen that the victim feels some kind of guilt or compassion to the persuader, and they want to help. But $1000 is a lot of money, more than the victim is able to lend. From here, the persuader is going to lessen their request from $1000 down to $200, the amount that they wanted from the beginning. Of course, there is some kind of emotional reason for needing the money, and the victim feels like it is impossible to refuse this second request. They want to help out the persuader, and they feel bad for not giving in to the initial request when they were asked. In the end, the persuader gest the $200 they originally wanted, and the victim is not going to know what has taken place. Another type of technique that the persuader can use is known as reverse psychology. This can also help to mask the true intentions during the persuasion. Some people have a personality that is known as a boomerang. This means that they will refuse to go in the direction that they are thrown and instead will veer off into different directions. If the persuader knows someone who is more of a boomerang type, then they are able to identify a key weakness of that person. For example, let’s say that a persuader has a friend who is attempting to win over some girl they like. The persuader knows that the friend will use and then hurt that girl. The girl is currently torn between the malicious friend and an innocent third party. The persuader may try to steer the girl in the direction of the guy who is actually a good choice, knowing that she is going to go against this and end up going with the harmful friend. Leading Questions Another method of dark persuasion that can be used is known as leading questions. If you have ever had an encounter with a salesman that is skilled, verbal persuasion can be really impactful when it is deployed in careful and calibrated ways. One of the most powerful techniques that can be used verbally is leading questions. These leading questions are going to be any questions that are intended to trigger a specific response out of the victim. The persuader may ask the target something like “how bad do you think those people are?” This question is going to imply that the people the persuader is asking about are definitely bad to some extent. They could have chosen to ask a question that was non leading, such as “how do you feel about those people?” Dark persuaders are masters at using leading questions in a way that is hard to catch. If the victim ever begins to feel that they are being led, then they are going to resist, and it is hard to lead them or persuade them. If a persuader ever senses that their victim starts to catch what is happening, they will quit using that one and switch over to another one. They may come back to that tactic, but only when the victim has quieted down a bit and is more influenceable again. The Law of State Transference State is a concept that is going to take a look at the general mood someone is in. If someone is aligned with their deeds, words, and thoughts, then this is an example of a strong and congruent state. The law of state transference is going to involve the concept of someone who holds the balance of power in a situation and can then transfer their emotional state onto the other person they are interacting with. This can be a very powerful tool for the dark persuader to use against their victim. Initially, the influencer is going to force their own state to match the state that their target naturally has. If the target is sad, and they talk slowly, the influencer is going to make their own state follow this format. The point of this is to create a deep rapport with the target. After we get to this state match, the influencer is then going to alter their own state subtly and see if they have some compliance for the victim. Perhaps they will choose to speed up their own voice to see if the victim will speed up as well. Once the victim starts to show these signs of compliance, then this is an indication that the influencer is at the hook point. Conclusion e are not amidst the Cold War any longer, however brainwashing or persuasion maybe it's as yet captivating and even worthwhile for a few. Regardless of whether it's through online advertisements, Russian bots, or super secret governmental projects, control and mind pliability involve intrigue, and we are generally potential subjects. Consider it next time you give a "like". Big Brother is watching you. Would it be a good idea for us to consider situational obstacles and companion pressure types of mentally conditioning? If that were the situation, at that point everything and nothing would establish mind control. We have studies that enlighten procedures of transformation and conditioning. We have chronicled models that show what individuals do under impulse. The brainwashing clarification overlooks this social logical research. It infantilizes people by denying them individual organization and recommending that they are not liable for their activities. The word brainwashed is still casually used to depict somebody who holds solid thoughts that are improbable and are totally impervious to prove, good judgment, experience and rationale. Particularly when these thoughts created under outside impact for example books, TV programs, others or a strict association.